$10,000 Gold?
SAN FRANCISCO – It has never been easy to have a rational conversation about the value of gold.
Lately, with gold prices up more than 300% over the last decade, it is harder than ever.
Just last December, fellow economists Martin Feldstein and Nouriel Roubini each penned op-eds bravely questioning bullish market sentiment, sensibly pointing out gold’s risks.
Wouldn’t you know it?
Since their articles appeared, the price of gold has moved up still further. Gold prices even hit a record-high $1,300 recently.
Last December, many gold bugs were arguing that the price was inevitably headed for $2,000.
Now, emboldened by continuing appreciation, some are suggesting that gold could be headed even higher than that.
One successful gold investor recently explained to me that stock prices languished for a more than a decade before the Dow Jones index crossed the 1,000 mark in the early 1980’s.
Since then, the index has climbed above 10,000.
Now that gold has crossed the magic $1,000 barrier, why can’t it increase ten-fold, too?
Admittedly, getting to a much higher price for gold is not quite the leap of imagination that it seems.
After adjusting for inflation, today’s price is nowhere near the all-time high of January 1980. Back then, gold hit $850, or well over $2,000 in today’s dollars.
But January 1980 was arguably a “freak peak” during a period of heightened geo-political instability.
At $1,300, today’s price is probably more than double very long-term, inflation-adjusted, average gold prices.
So what could justify another huge increase in gold prices from here?
One answer, of course, is a complete collapse of the US dollar.
With soaring deficits, and a rudderless fiscal policy, one does wonder whether a populist administration might recklessly turn to the printing press.
And if you are really worried about that, gold might indeed be the most reliable hedge.
Sure, some might argue that inflation-indexed bonds offer a better and more direct inflation hedge than gold.
But gold bugs are right to worry about whether the government will honor its commitments under more extreme circumstances.
In fact, as Carmen Reinhart and I discuss in our recent book on the history of financial crises, This Time is Different, cash-strapped governments will often forcibly convert indexed debt to non-indexed debt, precisely so that its value might be inflated away.
Even the United States abrogated indexation clauses in bond contracts during the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
So it can happen anywhere.
Even so, the fact that very high inflation is possible does not make it probable, so one should be cautious in arguing that higher gold prices are being driven by inflation expectations.
Some have argued instead that gold’s long upward march has been partly driven by the development of new financial instruments that make it easier to trade and speculate in gold.
There is probably some slight truth – and also a certain degree of irony – to this argument.
After all, medieval alchemists engaged in what we now consider an absurd search for ways to transform base metals into gold.
Wouldn’t it be paradoxical, then, if financial alchemy could make an ingot of gold worth dramatically more?
In my view, the most powerful argument to justify today’s high price of gold is the dramatic emergence of Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East into the global economy.
As legions of new consumers gain purchasing power, demand inevitably rises, driving up the price of scarce commodities.
At the same time, emerging-market central banks need to accumulate gold reserves, which they still hold in far lower proportion than do rich-country central banks.
With the euro looking less appetizing as a diversification play away from the dollar, gold’s appeal has naturally grown.
So, yes, there are solid fundamentals that arguably support today’s higher gold price, although it is far more debatable whether and to what extent they will continue to support higher prices in the future.
Indeed, another critical fundamental factor that has been sustaining high gold prices might prove far more ephemeral than globalization.
Gold prices are extremely sensitive to global interest-rate movements.
After all, gold pays no interest and even costs something to store.
Today, with interest rates near or at record lows in many countries, it is relatively cheap to speculate in gold instead of investing in bonds.
But if real interest rates rise significantly, as well they might someday, gold prices could plummet.
Most economic research suggests that gold prices are very difficult to predict over the short to medium term, with the odds of gains and losses being roughly in balance.
It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends.
Yes, gold has had a great run, but so, too, did worldwide housing prices until a couple of years ago.
If you are a high-net-worth investor, a sovereign wealth fund, or a central bank, it makes perfect sense to hold a modest proportion of your portfolio in gold as a hedge against extreme events.
But, despite gold’s heightened allure in the wake of an extraordinary run-up in its price, it remains a very risky bet for most of us.
Of course, such considerations might have little influence on prices.
What was true for the alchemists of yore remains true today: gold and reason are often difficult to reconcile.
Is Iraq the Next Afghanistan?
At the onset of the US-led war in Iraq, two competing views shaped predictions about the outcome. The first contended that overthrowing Saddam Hussein's regime would usher in a democratic era in Iraq that would serve as a model and catalyst for democratic change regionally.
Derided by detractors as a new "domino theory," this view presented intervention in Iraq as similar to America's role in post-WWII Japan.
Against the optimism of that "Japan scenario," pessimists argued that a "Somalia scenario" was more likely.
They staked their claim on the tribal, sectarian, and multiethnic nature of Iraq, which, in the absence of dictatorship, would supposedly incite Iraq's collapse into a "failed state," with rampant warlordism, ethnic and religious feuds, and harboring of terrorist organizations.
But the main question now is whether Iraq will drift along lines somewhere between these two scenarios, increasingly resembling Afghanistan.
This "Afghan scenario" implies a weak state with nominal power over effectively autonomous fiefdoms that are headed by strongmen who are represented in the central government.
Bad as it sounds, this prospect appears to be a "realistic" compromise between the supposedly utopian vision of a flourishing, unified democracy and the wretchedness of a failed state.
Many of the actions and policies of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), as well as higher-level Bush administration decisions, seem to point to a resigned acceptance that early hopes that Iraq would embrace Western-style democracy were misplaced.
Indeed, such hopes were misplaced.
Iraq's political culture - and that of most of the Middle East - is incompatible with the basic components of a recognizable Western-style democracy: notions of individual rights and responsibilities are lacking, the concept of a patriarchal state is deeply rooted, and individual cultural identity is rarely tied to the national community.
On the other hand, much circular logic figures in analyses that consider the "traditional" nature of Iraqi society an obstacle to liberal democracy.
For these analyses are hardly neutral, but unwittingly enter an ongoing confrontation.
In Iraq, as elsewhere in the Arab and Muslim worlds, a cultural war is being waged between two paradigms: grand narratives that accept and promote a collectivistic understanding (nationalism, socialism, Islamism), versus an implicit paradigm of individualistic modernity that is locally rooted yet informed by the global experience.
The frontlines of this war are notions of the individual, cultural identity, civil society, and the nation-state.
The religious Islamic component in Iraqi social life should not be underestimated. But it also should not be equated with the political Islamism that strives to capitalize on it.
Nationalist and leftist political discourses did leave an imprint on the Iraqi value system, but they are not its sole components.
Indeed, the nominal acceptance of grand narratives of "democracy" and "human rights" as common bases for political discourse represents a crucial shift in demarcating the cultural battle.
This cultural debate is not limited to the Arab scene.
There are also vigorous discussions in the West about the applicability of democratic institutions to the Arab context.
Advocates of the notion of "Arab exceptionalism," which questions the ability of Arab societies to adapt democratic systems are in fact objectively allied with "grand narrative" ideologues - and also with the beneficiaries of the Arab world's patronage-based political order.
The models used in the West, both in political circles and in academia, for the analysis and interpretation of Arab societies are seriously deficient.
In particular, many analyses nowadays promote an ethnic model, reducing Iraq to an artificial construct that rests atop a fragmented "reality" of separate communities.
Some have even suggested hastening the outcome predicted by this faulty view by dividing Iraq into its "genuine" original components: Sunni, Shi`i, and Kurd.
In fact, Iraqi society is more complex than this.
The reception and adoption of democracy is not a function of sectarian belonging, but a reflection of the multi-dimensional historical, cultural, religious, and political identities of Iraqi individuals.
Given the right circumstances, it is eminently possible to mobilize Iraqi society towards a democratic formulation of its state-to-be.
The fall of Saddam ushers in the right circumstances.
Indeed, the seeming failure of a recognizable democratic core to emerge in Iraq within the first few months of the collapse of Saddam's dictatorship is due more to idiosyncrasies of the process than to any presumed essential nature of Iraqi society.
Upon Saddam's fall, a large "middle ground" existed in Iraq that was positively disposed towards democratic discourse and practice.
Policy mistakes and reversals eroded this middle ground, opening a path for ideological Islamism and a reconstituted neo-Ba`athism.
The key mistake was the failure of occupation forces to equip and empower the small group of Iraqi liberal democratic figures to tap into this middle ground.
As a result, the space for a liberal democratic outcome receded.
But to treat this setback as a failure would be a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Iraqi democrats must re-assess and develop a clear public strategy.
The CPA, and the world community, must not prejudice the outcome of their efforts by accepting a facile and bogus view of Iraqi society.
Even if such efforts succeed, the road to a full-fledged democratic system in Iraq will still be arduous and expensive.
But instead of succumbing to a "Somalia scenario," dreaming of a "Japan scenario," or settling for an "Afghanistan scenario," Iraq may yet become a "scenario" for successful intervention in the 21 st century.
“Neo-Ottoman” Turkey?
ANKARA – Nowadays, the international media are obsessed with the question of who “lost” Turkey and what that supposed loss means for Europe and the West.
More alarmingly, some commentators liken Turkey’s neighborhood policy to a revival of Ottoman imperialism.
Recently, a senior Turkish columnist went so far as to quote Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu as saying that “we are indeed neo-Ottoman.”
As someone who was present when Davutoğlu made his presentation to the parliamentary faction of Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), I can attest to the fact that he did not use such terminology.
In fact, Davutoğlu and all of us in the AKP foreign-policy community never use this term, because it is simply a mispresentation of our position.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is devised to reintegrate Turkey into its immediate neighborhoods, including the Balkans, the Black Sea, the Caucasus, the Middle East, and the Eastern Mediterranean.
We aim to deepen our political dialogue, increase our trade, and multiply our people-to-people contacts with our neighbors in the form of sports, tourism, and cultural actvities.
When Egon Bahr formulated his Ostpolitik in the 1960’s, no one asked Will Brandt whether Germany was lost.
God bestowed upon Turkey a geographical position that fundamentally requires for us to engage with East and West, North and South.
This is neither a choice nor a luxury – it is a necessity.
The symbol of the Byzantine and the Selçuk Empires, which occupied roughly the same geography that Turkey does today, was a double-headed eagle looking both east and west.
It should be no wonder that Turkey is also seeking to engage both ends of its territories and feels that its security is best consolidated by minimizing risks together with its neighbors.
So we find the current debate on Turkey’s orientation rather superflous, and in some cases ill-intentioned.
Our neighborhood policy needs support, not criticism.
Turkey has become an invaluable asset in the make-up of our surrounding regions, and is already changing the status quo in favor of more stability and predictability.
Our efforts at normalization with Armenia, for example, are destined to bring change to the entire South Caucasus.
We are doing our part in terms of burden-sharing.
Sensible Europeans understand that.
To be sure, some of our neighbors are difficult.
But no country has the luxury of choosing its neighbors.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is very realistic, based on genuine interests, not some romantic neo-Ottoman nostagia, as more than a few international commentators have suggested.
True, there is a neo-Ottoman revival in the cultural field, and our citizens are eager to rediscover Ottoman life, culture, and practices.
As Turkey is normalizing domestically, it is also reinterpreting its national historical narrative.
This is a natural byproduct of consolidating our democracy.
However, trying to paint our carefully constructed foreign-policy initiatives with imperialist overtones is not only a stark mispresentation, but also does gross injustice to our well-intentioned efforts to stabilize our region.
In Roman mythology, Janus was the god of gates, doorways, beginnings, and endings.
Turkey today is a Janus-like geography that offers gates and doorways to the East and West.
It offers beginnings and endings to the Caucasus, the Black Sea, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean.
In this capacity, Turkey complements and contributes to a unique transitional passage between otherwise difficult regions, for it signifies centuries-old co-existence and adjustment.
Turkish foreign policy contributes to that coming together and helps its immeditate neighborhoods to connect with one another.
Contrary to recent charges, Turkey’s foreign policymakers are not seeking to revive the Ottoman Empire.
Instead, we seek Turkey’s historic reintegration into its immediate neighborhoods, thereby correcting an anomaly of the Cold War years.
Such re-integration would only benefit the European Union and our other Western, NATO allies.
None of them, therefore, has any reason to express discomfort with Turkey.
Why Wait for the Euro?
Although the EU's eastward enlargement has not yet happened, the debate is already shifting to ask what will follow: when should the new, predominantly postcommunist, members adopt the euro?
Assuming that they comply with the Maastricht Treaty's provisions concerning the EMU - and are not unfairly held to more stringent criteria - the core issue is whether new members would benefit more by waiting or whether they should seek early entry. 
At the outset, it must be stressed that, in seeking earlier entry into the EMU a country assumes a more ambitious fiscal and structural program than would be needed if EMU membership is delayed.
Early entry, otherwise, would be an empty gesture. 
I believe that early adoption of the euro is not only possible, but preferable to delay.
By early adoption I mean the shortest permissible period of time - two years - following a new member subordinating its monetary policy to the fiscal and monetary constraints of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II).
Assuming entry into both the EU and ERM II in 2004, new members should aim to enter the eurozone around 2006. 
Is this realistic?
Well, most candidate countries have already achieved a high degree of structural convergence with the EU.
Exports to the Union have soared since 1991, when the collapse of the Soviet-era COMECON trading system forced a radical reorientation of trade - helped by massive foreign investment from the EU - towards Western markets.
Most accession candidates now send more exports to the EU than Greece, Portugal, and Spain did when they entered the EU and EMU. 
Progress on disinflation is similarly impressive.
Annual inflation in most candidate countries has fallen to 4-5% - not much higher than in many EU countries, and lower than in The Netherlands last year.
As with structural convergence, EU candidates already outperform Spain, Portugal, and Greece at a comparable time before their EMU debut.
Nor is there much risk of large, future corrective price swings because all but a few prices are completely liberalized. 
Theoretical studies suggest that inflation in the accession countries will remain stubbornly higher than the Maastricht Treaty allows.
The culprit in this pessimistic view is the so-called "Balassa-Samuelson" effect: rapid productivity growth in the accession candidates' tradable sectors - export manufacturing, for example - is pushing up real wages throughout their economies, including in non-tradable sectors like services.
This overall rise in real wages in the face of lower productivity growth for the service sector boosts relative prices and keeps inflation above the eurozone average. 
The Balassa-Samuelson effect is still evident in Greece, Spain and Portugal.
But as empirical research prepared by the CEC5 National Banks estimates, its contribution to total price growth in the candidate countries is 1-2%.
With the Balassa-Samuelson effect so subdued and limited scope for future corrective inflation, the EMU criterion regarding price stability - of annual inflation within 1.5% of the average rate for the three best-performing economies in the EU - is within reach. 
But is early admission to EMU preferable to postponing membership?
From the standpoint of current member states, would admitting Hungary, Latvia, Poland, or Slovakia, sooner rather than later, drag down the euro as many fear? 
Fears that extending EMU to new states "too soon" would undermine the euro's external exchange rate are irrational.
If all candidate countries join the EU at around the same time, they will together account for a mere 6% of its total GDP.
So any negative impact on the euro from rapid accession to EMU would at worst amount to little more than a rounding error. 
Delaying entry into EMU could make sense if a longer wait produced more information.
But a wait of greater length might produce nothing but added noise.
Equally, the transition period is already turbulent, with convergence-driven capital flows driving up exchange rates and complicating monetary policy in several candidate countries, including Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary.
Indeed, capital-flow volatility could make short work of the flexible exchange rate on offer under ERM II - a 15% fluctuation band either side of a central parity. 
Some argue that ERM II membership should be viewed as a longer-term proposition - possibly lasting until 2010 - for the benefit of candidates themselves.
The benefit is simple: ERM II permits some exchange rate flexibility, as opposed to the fixed rates implied by adopting the euro.
This would help keep the candidates' economic output high and thus sustain real convergence with average EU income levels. 
This is an exceptionally weak argument, and a politically suspect one, too.
As European Central Bank data shows, average per capita GDP in the accession candidates is 44% of the eurozone level.
The size of the income gap combines with the small growth differentials to imply that the process of real convergence will extend far beyond even the most cautious dates for EU and EMU entry, probably lasting several decades.
More important, long-lasting economic growth does not depend on the type of exchange rate - whether flexible or fixed (EMU) - while early accession will speed up crucial reforms. 
A few years of limited exchange rate flexibility is a poor substitute for rapid completion of structural reforms.
In almost all candidates, further disinflation and long-term economic growth require fiscal consolidation, more flexible labor markets, and completion of privatization.
Delaying EMU entry risks weakening the incentive to complete these politically costly but necessary reforms. 
Any delay in completing reforms will ultimately slow the process of real convergence that EU officials rightly hold dear.
Early adoption, by contrast, would be more conducive to these reforms, and thus to real convergence.
Success here would allow candidate countries to start reaping the benefits of greater price transparency, reduced transaction costs, and a solid macroeconomic framework.
This strategy, not one of deferred entry, promises the most for both the EU's current and its future members. 
1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades.
The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity. By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
The End of 1945
NEW YORK – On May 8, 1945, when World War II in Europe officially ended, much of the world lay in ruins.
But if the human capacity for destruction knows few limits, the ability to start over again is just as remarkable.
Perhaps that is why mankind has so far managed to survive.
No doubt, millions of people at the end of the war were too hungry and exhausted to do anything much beyond staying alive.
But, at the same time, a wave of idealism swept across the wreckage, a collective sense of determination to build a more equal, peaceful, and safer world.
That is why the war’s great hero, Winston Churchill, was voted out of office in the summer of 1945, even before Japan surrendered.
Men and women had not risked their lives simply to return to the old days of class privilege and social deprivation.
They wanted better housing, education, and free health care for all.
Similar demands were heard all over Europe, where the anti-Nazi or anti-fascist resistance was often led by leftists, or indeed Communists, and prewar conservatives were frequently tainted by collaboration with fascist regimes.
There was talk of revolution in countries such as France, Italy, and Greece.
This did not happen, because neither the Western Allies nor the Soviet Union supported it.
Stalin was content to settle for an empire in Eastern Europe.
But even Charles de Gaulle, a resistance leader of the right, had to accept Communists in his first postwar government, and he agreed to nationalize industries and banks.
The swing to the left, to social-democratic welfare states, occurred all over Western Europe.
It was part of the 1945 consensus.
A different kind of revolution was taking place in Europe’s former colonies in Asia, where native peoples had no desire to be ruled once more by Western powers, which had been so ignominiously defeated by Japan.
Vietnamese, Indonesians, Filipinos, Burmese, Indians, and Malays wanted their freedom, too.
These aspirations were often voiced in the United Nations, founded in 1945.
The UN, like the dream of European unity, was also part of the 1945 consensus.
For a short while, many prominent people – Albert Einstein, for one – believed that only a world government would be able to ensure global peace.
This dream quickly faded when the Cold War divided the world into two hostile blocs.
But in some ways the 1945 consensus, in the West, was strengthened by Cold War politics.
Communism, still wrapped in the laurel leaf of anti-fascism, had a wide intellectual and emotional appeal, not only in the so-called Third World, but also in Western Europe.
Social democracy, with its promise of greater equality and opportunities for all, served as an ideological antidote.
Most social democrats were in fact fiercely anti-communist.
Today, 70 years later, much of the 1945 consensus no longer survives.
Few people can muster great enthusiasm for the UN.
The European dream is in crisis.
And the post-war social-democratic welfare state is being eroded more and more every day.
The rot began during the 1980s, under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
Neoliberals attacked the expense of entitlement programs and the vested interests of trade unions.
Citizens, it was thought, had to become more self-reliant; government welfare programs were making everyone soft and dependent.
In Thatcher’s famous words, there was no such thing as “society,” only families and individuals who ought to be taking care of themselves.
But the 1945 consensus was dealt a much greater blow precisely when we all rejoiced at the collapse of the Soviet Empire, the other great twentieth-century tyranny.
In 1989, it looked as if the dark legacy of World War II, the enslavement of Eastern Europe, was finally over.
And in many ways, it was.
But much else collapsed with the Soviet model.
Social democracy lost its raison d’être as an antidote to Communism.
All forms of leftist ideology – indeed, everything that smacked of collective idealism – came to be viewed as misguided utopianism that could lead only to the Gulag.
Neoliberalism filled the vacuum, creating vast wealth for some people, but at the expense of the ideal of equality that had emerged from World War II.
The extraordinary reception of Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century shows how keenly the consequences of the collapse of the left have been felt.
In recent years, other ideologies have also emerged to fill the human need for collective ideals.
The rise of right-wing populism reflects revived yearnings for pure national communities that keep immigrants and minorities out.
And, perversely, American neo-conservatives have transformed the internationalism of the old left by seeking to impose a democratic world order by US military force.
The answer to these alarming developments is not nostalgia.
We cannot simply return to the past.
Too much has changed.
But a new aspiration toward social and economic equality, and international solidarity, is badly needed.
It cannot be the same as the 1945 consensus, but we would do well, on this anniversary, to remember why that consensus was forged in the first place.
What Failed in 2008?
BERKELEY – To solve a problem, it is not enough to know what to do.
You actually have to implement the solution – and be willing to change course if it turns out that you did not know quite as much as you thought.
That is the message of two recent books that, together, tell you everything you need to know about the 2008 financial crisis: what caused it, what can be done to prevent it from recurring, and why those things have yet to be done.
The first book is The Shifts and the Shocks, by the conservative British journalist Martin Wolf, who begins by cataloguing the major shifts that set the stage for the economic disaster that continues to shape the world today.
His starting point is the huge rise in wealth among the world’s richest 0.1% and 0.01% and the consequent pressure for people, governments, and companies to take on increasingly unsustainable levels of debt.
Meanwhile, policymakers were lulled into complacency by the widespread acceptance of economic theories such as the “efficient-market hypothesis,” which assumes that investors act rationally and use all available information when making their decisions.
As a result, markets were deregulated, making it easier to trade assets that were perceived to be safe, but were in fact not.
As a result, systemic risk proliferated beyond central bankers’ wildest imagination.
Untested – and ultimately incorrect – assumptions created a policymaking environment defined by what can only be called hubris.
Officials underestimated tail risks.
They set inflation targets at around 2% – leaving little room for maneuver when the water got choppy.
And, most audaciously of all, the European Union introduced the euro as a common currency.
Indeed, wrongheaded policymaking continued long after the crisis began.
Politicians responded to worsening economic conditions by hewing as closely as possible to failed prescriptions, making sure to do no more than absolutely necessary to address the biggest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
Wolf’s prescription for countering the crisis is simple, smart, and unassailable.
In the short term, he suggests that countries with reserve currencies spend more (especially to finance public-sector investments) and issue more debt.
Their central banks, he argues, should raise inflation targets to 3% or even 4% per year.
Over the medium term, according to Wolf, countries need to put in place regulatory measures that lower debt levels and discourage overleveraging.
The eurozone, too, must resolve its internal contradictions, either by disbanding or by introducing “a minimum set of institutions and policies” that allow the monetary union to function properly.
Wolf’s long-term solutions include tackling inequality, “more global regulation,” a greater degree of “freedom for individual countries to craft their own responses,” and economic analysis that is less in thrall to the free-market ideologues that led us into the crisis in the first place.
And yet, as recommendable as Wolf’s proposals may be, little has been done to implement them.
The reasons why are found in the second book: Hall of Mirrors, by&nbsp;my friend, teacher, and patron, Barry Eichengreen.
Eichengreen traces our tepid response to the crisis to the triumph of monetarist economists, the disciples of Milton Friedman, over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers – at least when it comes to interpretations of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
When the 2008 financial crisis erupted, policymakers tried to apply Friedman’s proposed solutions to the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, this turned out to be the wrong thing to do, as the monetarist interpretation of the Great Depression was, to put it bluntly, wrong in significant respects and radically incomplete.
The resulting policies were enough to prevent the post-2008 recession from developing into a full-blown depression; but that partial success turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory, for it allowed politicians to declare that the crisis had been overcome, and that it was time to embrace austerity and focus on structural reform.
The result is today’s stagnant economy, marked by anemic growth that threatens to become the new normal.
The United States and Europe are on track to have thrown away 10% of their potential wealth, while the failure to strengthen financial-sector regulation has left the world economy exposed to the risk of another major crisis.
Wolf and Eichengreen would agree that the main shortcomings that led to the 2008 financial crisis – and that continue to underpin our inadequate response to it – are intellectual.
Indeed, the only true lesson of the crisis so far seems to be that its lessons will never truly be learned.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers.
And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
9/11 in Perspective
NEW YORK – It was a decade ago that 19 terrorists took control of four planes, flew two into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon with a third, and crashed the fourth in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers resisted and made it impossible for the terrorists to complete their malevolent mission.
In a matter of hours, more than 3,000 innocent people, mostly Americans, but also people from 115 other countries, had their lives suddenly and violently taken from them.
September 11, 2001, was a terrible tragedy by any measure, but it was not a historical turning point.
It did not herald a new era of international relations in which terrorists with a global agenda prevailed, or in which such spectacular terrorist attacks became commonplace.
On the contrary, 9/11 has not been replicated.
Despite the attention devoted to the “Global War on Terrorism,” the most important developments of the last ten years have been the introduction and spread of innovative information technologies, globalization, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the political upheavals in the Middle East. 
As for the future, it is much more likely to be defined by the United States’ need to put its economic house in order; China’s trajectory within and beyond its borders; and the ability of the world’s governments to cooperate on restoring economic growth, stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, and meeting energy and environmental challenges.
It is and would be wrong to make opposition to terrorism the centerpiece of what responsible governments do in the world.
Terrorists continue to be outliers with limited appeal at best.
They can destroy but not create.
It is worth noting that the people who went into the streets of Cairo and Damascus calling for change were not shouting the slogans of Al Qaeda or supporting its agenda.
Moreover, measures have been implemented to push back, successfully, against terrorists.
Intelligence assets have been redirected.
Borders have been made more secure and societies more resilient.
International cooperation has increased markedly, in part because governments that cannot agree on many things can agree on the need to cooperate in this area.
Military force has played a role as well.
Al Qaeda lost its base in Afghanistan when the Taliban government that had provided it sanctuary was ousted from power.
Osama bin-Laden was finally found and killed by US Special Forces in the suburbs of Islamabad.
Drones – unmanned aircraft that are remotely steered – have proven to be effective in killing a significant number of terrorists, including many of the most important leaders.
Weak governments can be made stronger; governments that tolerate or support terrorism must be held accountable.
But progress is not to be confused with victory.
Terrorists and terrorism cannot be eliminated any more than we can rid the world of disease.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent men, women, and children in pursuit of political goals.
Indeed, terrorists are advancing in some areas.
Pakistan remains a sanctuary for Al Qaeda and some of the world’s other most dangerous terrorists.
A mixture of instability, government weakness, and ideology in countries such as Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Nigeria are providing fertile territory for terrorists to organize, train, and mount operations – much as they did in Afghanistan did a decade ago.
New groups constantly emerge from the ruins of old ones.
There is also a growing danger of homegrown terrorism.
We have seen it in Great Britain and the US.
The Internet, one of the great inventions of the modern Western world, has shown itself to be a weapon that can be used to incite and train those who wish to cause harm to that world.
The question raised in October 2003 by then US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is no less relevant today: “Are we capturing, killing, or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrassas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training, and deploying against us?” All things being equal, we probably are.
But even small terrorist successes are costly in terms of lives, money, and making open societies less so.
What is to be done?
Alas, there is no single or silver bullet.
The establishment of a Palestinian state will not be enough for those terrorists who want to see the elimination of the Jewish state, any more than reaching a compromise over Kashmir will satisfy those Pakistan-based terrorists with bigger agendas vis-à-vis India.
Reducing unemployment is desirable, of course, but many terrorists do not come from poverty.
Helping to make societies in the Middle East and elsewhere more democratic might reduce the alienation that can lead to radicalism and worse, but this is easier said than done.
Of course, we want to continue to find ways to make ourselves less vulnerable and terrorists more so.
But what may be most important, particularly in the Arab and Islamic communities, is to end any acceptance of terrorism.
The Nigerian father who warned the US embassy in Lagos that he feared what his own son might do – before that same young man attempted to detonate a bomb aboard a flight to Detroit on Christmas Day 2009 – is an example of just this.
Only when more parents, teachers, and community leaders behave likewise will recruitment of terrorists dry up and law-enforcement authorities receive full cooperation from the populations they police.
Terrorism must lose its legitimacy among those who have historically supported or tolerated it before it will lose its potency.
A “Portfolio” Approach to Climate Change
The world has tried with little success to cut carbon emissions under the Kyoto Protocol.
The enormous effort expended to bring the Protocol into force nonetheless indicates how much work will be required to produce the next treaty, due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December 2009.
Campaigners will push for tough and far-reaching policies, but strong resistance will continue from countries concerned about their economic vitality.
The new negotiations will have one advantage over the earlier efforts, because governments now understand the need for a portfolio of adaptation, mitigation, and research efforts.
New research that my colleagues and I undertook for the Copenhagen Consensus Center in Denmark explores the effectiveness of different responses to this global challenge, but it strongly supports the portfolio approach for several reasons.
First, we now know that adaptation will be essential, because temperatures will rise by another 0.6°C by 2100 even if greenhouse gas emissions are eliminated tomorrow.
We also know that the impact of climate change will not be evenly distributed across the globe.
In some areas, modestly warmer temperatures could produce higher crop yields if associated changes in precipitation patterns are not adverse and/or irrigation remains viable.
Even with 0.6°C warming, however, Africa and South Asia will experience almost immediate reductions in the viability of many crops and, eventually, increased vulnerability to infectious disease.
These impacts will clearly hit the planet’s worst-off inhabitants hardest: the “bottom billion” who already bear the heaviest burden of disease, poverty, conflict and malnutrition.&#160;
Ensuring that adaptive capacity is expanded and exploited where it is most needed is thus a key challenge.
Long-term development may give countries more capacity to soften the impact of climate change on the environment and citizens’ health, but in the meantime the planet’s poorest people will need help from the rich.
Our analysis investigated, for example, the merits of more targeted policies for the near term: purchasing mosquito-resistant bed nets and oral re-hydration malaria therapy for children in the poorest nations affected by climate change.
The goal was to deal aggressively and proactively with some of the marginal health impacts of global warming.
Benefits would appear almost immediately, but would dissipate over time as economies developed.
Even as development improves conditions, however, reducing carbon emissions would become increasingly important over the longer term as the impact of climate change become more severe.
Since the effects of climate change have been observed in many areas around the world, thinking about mitigation makes sense everywhere.
But we found that mitigation
The Copenhagen Consensus study also examined a portfolio option of the sort heralded by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
We allocated $50 billion to research into greener technology, so that only $750 billion could be absorbed by the economic cost of adaptation and mitigation.
The gap between the cost of carbon-free and carbon-emitting technology fell, and the taxes designed to mitigate emissions became more effective.
As a result, the research and development program essentially paid for itself, and total discounted benefits for the $800 billion investment climbed to more than $2.1 trillion.&#160;
Ensuring that research and development is part of the world’s climate change response portfolio would make mitigation efforts more efficient and significantly enhance their ability to reduce carbon emissions over the next century.
But these favorable net benefits reflect very conservative assumptions regarding the timing of emissions reductions and when the developing world would “come onboard.”
Optimizing investment in the portfolio over time would, for example, increase the discounted benefits by more than a factor of three.
Expected benefits would increase further if we included the chance that potentially higher climate sensitivities would exacerbate damages, even though doing so would require including similarly plausible lower climate sensitivities, which would push in the opposite direction.
Fighting climate change can be a sound investment, even though neither mitigation nor adaptation alone will be enough to “solve” the problem.
To make a real difference, especially in the near term, the world must combine mitigation and adaptation with increased research and development into carbon-saving and sequestering technology, which in turn requires designing and exploiting market-based incentives.
A “Reset” Button for Europe’s Backyard
STOCKHOLM – One year after the war in Georgia of last August, pushing the “reset” button on diplomatic relations is a popular endeavor nowadays.
President Barack Obama recently journeyed to Moscow in order to “reset” strained United States-Russian ties.
The European Union, though not in need of a “reset” because of strained ties with its eastern neighbors, is involved in a deep strategic reconstruction of those relations.
When the EU launched its new “Eastern Partnership” in May, the purpose was to promote further integration with the Union’s six immediate eastern neighbors – Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine.
The global financial crisis had made an updated and strengthened policy for the EU’s eastern neighborhood an urgent need.
Equally important was the fact that all the countries concerned expressed an ambition to move closer to the EU.
The Eastern Partnership – originating from a Polish/Swedish initiative – offers to the six countries a substantial upgrading and deepening of relations with the EU in key areas.
In trade and economic relations, it clearly sets out the objective of establishing deep and comprehensive free-trade areas between the EU and the partner countries.
It confirms full visa liberalization as a long-term goal (with visa facilitation agreements in the meantime), promises enhanced cooperation on energy security, diversification, and efficiency, and comes with dedicated programs and projects to help the neighbors in their integration and reform efforts in all these areas.
Sweden’s assumption of the EU Presidency this month should help these efforts.
However, it comes at a time when the Union’s eastern neighborhood faces severe challenges, with the financial and economic crisis hitting many of the partner countries hard.
Ukraine suffers from the sharp drop in global demand and trade, severely undermining its steel industry.
Georgia’s economic success has been largely dependent on direct foreign investment, for which there is hardly any appetite today.
Partner countries that are less integrated into the global market, such as Moldova, have seen the crisis arrive more slowly, but the real effect might be equally as bad, and they are likely to recover more slowly.
The Eastern Partnership does not offer any quick remedies to the crisis.
But it can provide a political framework and institution-building support to improve the deficiencies that made these countries so vulnerable to the crisis: imperfect market economies, weak state institutions, and continued corruption.
The Eastern Partnership’s offer of deep integration with the EU in the areas such as trade and energy carries with it considerable transformational power.
The other type of crisis that most of the partner countries are enduring is political.
In most of these countries, democratic development has not yet reached a point where a change in government is a routine part of political life and can take place without risking the country’s stability.
The Eastern Partnership is based on the profound values of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
Political association with the EU, and the process of integration under this Partnership, will promote reforms in these key areas.
The Swedish EU Presidency will concentrate on starting up the concrete work – the nuts and bolts – of the Partnership.
The establishment of “Comprehensive Institution-Building Programs,” designed to support reform of key institutions in each partner country, should take place before the year’s end.
Some flagship initiatives proposed by the European Commission will finally see the light of day as well, and new projects and initiatives are likely to be developed.
Here, Sweden will attach particular importance to energy efficiency programs, which will serve not only the purposes of enhancing energy security and reducing costs, but will also be an important contribution to the fight against climate change.
The Swedish Presidency, together with the European Commission, intends to organize the first meeting of the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum this autumn.
We hope to see the start of parliamentary cooperation, as well as exchanges between local and regional authorities of the thirty-three EU and partner countries.
At the end of the year, a meeting of EU foreign ministers and their colleagues from the six partners will assess the progress made so far and give guidance on the way ahead.
The Eastern Partnership is about EU integration, about the six countries moving closer to the EU’s values, legislation, and ways of working, and about the EU being there to support and help this convergence.
In Russia, there is a perception that is sometimes fostered which suggests that the Partnership is directed against it.
But this, of course, is untrue.
On the contrary, Russia, like Turkey, will be welcome to take part in relevant activities within the Partnership’s multilateral dimensions.
The Eastern Partnership is not an answer to all the problems and difficulties that the six partners are facing.
Nevertheless, it does represent a clear commitment by the EU to lend its political and economic support to their transition and reform – a process that should bring prosperity and stability to the whole region.
A “Third Way” for Confronting Russia
PARIS – “Let’s engage Russia if we can, but contain it if we must.”
These two alternatives already defined Western strategy toward Russia in the mid-1990’s.
Since then, Russia may have changed dramatically, but not our questions about it.
What do you do when your big neighbor widens the gap that exists between its culture, which is European, and its political system, which is becoming increasingly “Asian,” at least in the bad old sense of “Oriental despotism”?
Should the best answer to the return of Russia’s imperial ambitions be a modern version of a Holy Alliance of stability designed to contain the world’s new maverick?
Or is a latter-day Yalta Conference, aimed at redrawing the political boundaries of Europe, necessary?
Could the answer be a bit of both?
If Russia is becoming what revolutionary France was under Napoleon, or reverting to Soviet form – shorn of a totalitarian ideology but with an appetite for conquest and re-conquest – what is needed is not the “league of democracies” advocated by some conservatives in America.
What is needed, instead, is a “stability league” that includes prominent actors like China, India, and other countries that are more interested in economic growth than in “rocking the boat” of the international system.
Such a strategy implies, first of all, a solid partnership with China, not because it is evolving in the direction of democracy, but because it is a status-quo power.
Such a strategy could lead to the opening of negotiations with Iran, and of course to a further closing of ranks within NATO.
The message to the Kremlin here would be crystal clear.
“Do not fool yourself. Nationalism and imperialism will lead you nowhere; you cannot expand geographically without serious costs to your economic growth and your personal enrichment.
Europe may be weak and divided, America may no longer be what it was, but with your falling population and the sad state of your economy beyond oil and gas, you simply are not equipped to be in the league of great global powers. China is; you are not.”
But the containment argument fails, because the Kremlin can still make mischief around the world by acting with Syria or Venezuela in an irresponsible manner.
More importantly, rallying the world solely against Russia would mean taking Russia’s great power pretensions too seriously.
For example, many Asians believe that Russia is a problem for Europe, but no longer for the world.
At the Cold War’s end, Japan remained obsessed with Russia as the heir to the Soviet Union.
Today, the Japanese are so concerned with China that they have little time for fears about Russia.
The other alternative to a rebirth of “containment” would consist in accepting the Russian argument, or more precisely, Russian “emotions.”
It would mean saying, in effect, “We have unnecessarily humiliated you over the last ten years.
From NATO enlargement to the grant of independence to Kosovo, we have deliberately ignored your sensitivities and your interests.
Let’s sit down together like Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin at Yalta and redesign a twenty-first-century map of Europe.
What do you want back?
What do we keep?”
This approach might recognize Russia’s droit de regard on the future evolution of the Caucasus.
Indeed, while talking tough under the guidance of Nicolas Sarkozy’s France, which currently holds the EU presidency, Europe has de facto resigned itself to Georgia’s dismemberment.
Russian troops are to remain in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The West is not about to declare war on Russia for the sake of a Georgia whose credibility has been greatly eroded by its president’s irresponsible behavior.
As for Ukraine, it may one day become part of the European Union, but its future is not in NATO.
Yet, between all-out containment, which is very unlikely and not necessarily desirable or realistic, and accommodation which borders on appeasement, which would be dangerous for Europe’s future, a third way, based on a few firm principles, must be found.
These principles are clear. First, Ukraine’s territorial integrity is not negotiable.
This has been said many times, but repetition does not diminish its importance.
Russia without Ukraine is a manageable nation-state; Russia with Ukraine is an unmanageable empire.
Second, even if the West condemns Georgia’s irresponsibility and incorporates into its policy Russia’s sensitivities on the complex historical feelings related to its ex-imperial territories, the Kremlin’s shameless brutality is unacceptable.
After all, this is Europe more than six decades after World War II, and nearly 20 years after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The use of force to settle scores and impose one nation’s will upon another cannot be accepted passively.
In the short term, time may be on Russia’s side.
In the long run – economically, demographically, politically, strategically – time is on “our” side, if we stick to our values and our principles.
A Bad Deal for America’s Future
WASHINGTON, DC – The painfully negotiated US budget legislation that President Barack Obama signed on August 2 combines an increase in America’s government debt ceiling with reductions in federal spending, thus averting the prospect of the first default in the 224-year history of the United States.
But the agreement has three major flaws.
Two of them offset each other, but the third threatens what America needs most in the coming years: economic growth.
The first flaw is that the spending reductions are badly timed: coming as they do when the US economy is weak, they risk triggering another recession.
The measure’s second shortcoming, however, is that the spending reductions that it mandates are modest.
While the legislation does too little to address America’s problem of chronic and rising budget deficits, the damage that it inflicts on the economy in the short term is likely to be limited.
The third and most damaging flaw, however, is that the spending cuts come in the wrong places.
Because the Democrats in Congress have an almost religious commitment to preserving, intact, America’s principal welfare programs for senior citizens, Social Security and Medicare, the legislation does not touch either of them.
These programs’ costs will rise sharply as the 78-million-strong baby-boom generation – those born between 1946 and 1964 – retires and collects benefits, accounting for the largest increase in government spending and prospective deficits in the years ahead.
And, because the Republicans in Congress have an equally strong allergy to raising any taxes, any time, under any circumstances, the bill does not rely at all on tax increases – not even for the wealthiest Americans – for the deficit reduction that it provides.
All of the spending cuts come from the “discretionary” part of the federal budget, which excludes Social Security, Medicare, the Medicaid program for the poor, and interest on the national debt.
That leaves only about one-third of total federal spending from which to cut, and much of that goes to the defense budget, which Republicans will attempt to protect in the future.
So the structure established by the August 2 law concentrates deficit reduction on the “discretionary non-defense” part of the federal budget, which is only about 10% of it.
This is too small a pool of money from which to achieve deficit reduction on the scale that the US will need in the years ahead.
Worse yet, discretionary non-defense spending includes programs that are indispensable for economic growth – and economic growth is indispensable for America’s future prosperity and global standing.
Growth is, in the first place, the best way to reduce the country’s budget deficits.
The higher the growth rate, the more revenues the government will collect without raising tax rates; and higher revenues enable smaller deficits.
Moreover, economic growth is necessary to keep the promise – enormously important to individual Americans – that each generation will have the opportunity to become more prosperous than the preceding one, the popular term for which is “the American dream.”
Just as important for non-Americans, only robust economic growth can ensure that the US sustains its expansive role in the world, which supports the global economy and contributes to stability in Europe, East Asia, and the Middle East.
As Thomas L. Friedman and I explain in our forthcoming book That Used To Be Us: How America Fell Behind in the World It Invented and How We Can Come Back, a crucial factor in America's economic success has been an ongoing public-private partnership, which dates back to the founding of the country, that is imperiled by the pattern of budget cuts established by the August 2 legislation.
That partnership has five components: wider opportunities for education in order to produce a workforce with cutting-edge skills; investment in infrastructure – roads, power plants, and ports – that supports commerce; funds for research and development to expand the frontiers of knowledge in ways that generate new products; an immigration policy that attracts and retains talented people from beyond America’s borders; and business regulations strong enough to prevent disasters such as the near-meltdown of the financial system in 2008 but not so stringent as to stifle the risk-taking and innovation that produce growth.
The first three elements of the American formula for growth cost money, and that money is included in the “discretionary non-defense” part of the federal budget now targeted by the debt-ceiling legislation.
Cutting these programs will lower American economic growth in the long term, with negative consequences both at home and abroad.
Reducing the deficit by cutting funds for education, infrastructure, and research and development is akin to trying to lose weight by cutting off three fingers. Most of the weight will remain, and one’s life prospects will have worsened significantly.
Reducing deficits in order to raise the debt ceiling was the right thing to do, but the August 2 law does it in the wrong way.
Unless more deficit reduction, which is inevitable, comes from curbing entitlement benefits and increasing revenues, and less from programs vital for economic growth, the result will be a poorer, weaker US – and a more uncertain, if not unstable, world.
A Better and Safer Europe
To many, myself included, NATO's enlargement to take in, among others, the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania -- which were once Soviet republics -- is an impossible dream come true.
When the idea was first floated some 10 years ago, expansion into the Baltics was taken seriously by few people.
Until recently, Russia's robust opposition to the idea posed a serious obstacle, because it sharpened the impression that Russia regarded its so-called "near abroad" as a zone of special interest and influence.
NATO's enlargement makes it crystal clear that no country in the new Europe can be regarded as part of another country's "zone."
It assures the three small Baltic countries that the nightmare of occupation by big neighbors (Hitler's Reich and Stalin's USSR), which they endured for half-a-century -- will not be repeated.
By putting paid to any revanchist tendencies in Russia concerning the Baltics, Europe is made a safer place, and Russia is helped in its effort to redefine itself as a national state and not an empire.
Expansion will also create a better Europe because enlargement widens the territory in which countries are committed to NATO's political values, including individual rights as well as the rights of minorities.
Fortunately Russia now seems to grasp the value of this political aspect of NATO-enlargement.
Rightly so: enlargement of NATO is not an "expansion" that threatens Russia or other countries which strive for democratic political reforms.
On the contrary, expansion takes away the worries - be they real or imagined - that surround the situation of the large Russian-speaking populations that now live outside of Russia but within the borders of the former Soviet Union.
The civil rights of the Russian minorities in the Baltics and elsewhere are now enshrined in law, due in no small part to NATO demands.
Those civil rights initiatives on the part of NATO reflect the increasingly workmanlike way that Russia, Europe, and America now work out their disagreements.
Indeed, enlargement of NATO comes only a few days after a deal was struck between Russia and the EU on the tricky question of access to the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad.
This small piece of Russia, with 1 million inhabitants and bordering on the Baltic Sea, is squeezed between Poland and Lithuania, two future members of the EU.
This could have incited a complicated situation where Russians were faced with tough visa requirements when travelling between Kaliningrad and Russia proper.
A deal was struck between President Putin and the EU that makes access much easier without compromising the status of Lithuania and Poland within the EU-regime.
This, in turn, created once again the kind of win-win situation that is so important for future relations between the EU and Russia.
When the enlargement of the EU into Central and Eastern Europe is finally decided by the European Council in Copenhagen next month, the conclusion is clear: Europe has become a much better and safer place to live in, thanks to the decisions taken by NATO and the EU during the crucial autumn of 2002.
But this is no cause for complacency. For the really hard work is only now beginning: dealing with all the internal practical and political problems that these enlargements will bring, as well as reckoning with countries in the membership waiting rooms, in particular Russia.
Relations with Russia are of vital importance if Europe is to continue to improve the quality of life of its citizens and address concerns of safety.
The common threat of international terrorism must be faced jointly.
We need to convince each other that the fight against this common enemy has to be fought with a keen eye to balancing the needs of security with those of human and minority rights.
Kaliningrad could be a litmus test of these relations.
The first hurdle has been overcome with the agreement on access to the enclave.
The next hurdle is to support Kalingrad's fight against disease and crime as well as strengthening its economic and social structures.
This calls for generosity from the EU and flexibility from Moscow.
In a wider context this could lead to a strengthening of the so-called Northern Dimension of the EU, where the goal is a free trade area to include all the countries around the Baltic Sea.
Such a grand project can be achieved if the political will exists and asserts itself.
Only a few years ago EU and NATO enlargement were regarded as wild dreams.
But determination and political will has now made the dreams come true.
Now is the time to set new ambitious goals for Europe.
A Better Way to Reduce Nuclear Risks
In 1977, when I served in President Jimmy Carter's State Department, I was sent to India to dissuade that country's leaders from developing a nuclear bomb.
My hosts replied that they needed to keep up with China.
I said that Pakistan would inevitably follow suit and the world would become less safe.
India promised that it would not export its weapons technology.
So far as we know, its leaders have kept their word.
But revelations about the nuclear weapons smuggling network organized by A. Q. Khan, the father of Pakistan's bomb, confirm the danger I predicted back then.
Some call Khan's network an effort to spread an "Islamic bomb," but given that North Korea was on the list of recipients along with Libya and Iran, it might better be termed a corrupt bomb.
As events in Pakistan illustrate, the spread of nuclear technology does not extend the stability that comes with mutual deterrence.
Rather, it increases the prospects of corrupt leakage that may allow terrorist groups access to nuclear weapons.
That makes everyone less safe.
Any pathological group of extremists could destroy New Delhi, Tokyo, Paris, or any city they chose.
Now the world's attention is focussed on Iran, one recipient of Pakistani technology, as the country seemingly keenest to create its own nuclear arsenal.
According to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran began enriching uranium at a pilot centrifuge plant last August, and is constructing larger underground enrichment facilities.
Iran proclaims that its programs are for peaceful generation of nuclear energy, but inspectors have already found traces of highly enriched weapons-grade uranium.
Last October, Mohamed El Baradei, the head of the IAEA, announced that Iran had accepted enhanced inspection procedures.
In addition, after visits by the French, British, and German foreign ministers, Iran announced a temporary suspension of its enrichment program.
Now it hints that it may resume enrichment, and recent press reports about the imports from Pakistan suggest Iran failed to disclose everything to the IAEA.
Iran claims that as a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, it has the right to enrich uranium for peaceful purposes.
Correct, because the NPT was born with a loophole.
Even if a country agrees to broad ranging IAEA inspections, it can legally accumulate enriched uranium (or reprocessed plutonium) under the guise of a peaceful energy program, and then suddenly declare that circumstances have changed and withdraw from the treaty - with the ability to produce nuclear weapons on short notice.
If Iran did this, it would not only add to the dangers in an unstable region, but would likely begin a process of unravelling the non-proliferation regime worldwide.
Iran may ask what right others have to demand that it forego nuclear weapons.
The answer lies both in the fact that it promised not to do so when it signed the NPT and in the consequences that it would impose on others.
For these reasons, President Bush declared an Iranian nuclear weapon unacceptable.
However, America's unilateral options are limited.
Not only is the US military busy trying in Iraq, but the way the US went into Iraq - which proved to have fewer nuclear capabilities than Iran - undermined American credibility, making it difficult to recruit allies to contain Iran's nuclear ambitions.
Fortunately, there is a multilateral option and an existing precedent. In the mid-1970's, many parties to the NPT planned to import and develop enrichment and reprocessing facilities.
Realizing the threat to the non-proliferation regime, countries as diverse as the Soviet Union, France, Germany, and Japan formed a "Nuclear Suppliers Group" that restrained the export of enrichment and reprocessing facilities.
That plugged part of the loophole in the treaty without amending it.
Today, such countries should join together to offer Iran (and others) a deal.
Countries that wish to develop nuclear energy but not nuclear bombs should be given international guarantees of fuel supply and disposal of spent fuel.
For example, Russia, which is helping Iran construct a nuclear reactor at Bushehr, should offer Iran a guarantee of low enriched uranium fuel and reprocessing of the reactor's spent fuel by sending it back to Russia if Iran agrees to forego enrichment and reprocessing.
This deal could then be given teeth by the UN Security Council.
The Council would declare that further proliferation of nuclear weapons is a threat to peace, and that any country moving in that direction is subject to sanctions.
Such a resolution would also include a carrot by guaranteeing Iran access to the non-dangerous parts of the nuclear energy fuel cycle.
The pot could be further sweetened by offers to relax existing sanctions and provide a security guarantee if Iran remains non-nuclear.
European foreign ministers have already expressed their concerns about Iran's nuclear program.
Russia indicates that it is willing to provide such fuel services.
It is time for the Security Council to try to internationalize the most dangerous parts of the nuclear fuel cycle.
It is not too late to learn the lessons of the misadventures of A. Q. Khan.
A Big Chance for Small Farmers
NEW YORK – The G-8’s $20 billion initiative on smallholder agriculture, launched at the group’s recent summit in L’Aquila, Italy, is a potentially historic breakthrough in the fight against hunger and extreme poverty.
With serious management of the new funds, food production in Africa will soar.
Indeed, the new initiative, combined with others in health, education, and infrastructure, could be the greatest step so far toward achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the internationally agreed effort to reduce extreme poverty, disease, and hunger by half by 2015 .
During 2002-2006, I led the United Nations Millennium Project, which aimed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, for then-UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
One cornerstone of the project was “smallholder farmers,” meaning peasant farm families in Africa, Latin America, and Asia – working farms of around one hectare (2.5 acres) or less.
These are some of the poorest households in the world, and, ironically, some of the hungriest as well, despite being food producers.
They are hungry because they lack the ability to buy high-yield seeds, fertilizer, irrigation equipment, and other tools needed to increase productivity.
As a result, their output is meager and insufficient for their subsistence.
Their poverty causes low farm productivity, and low farm productivity reinforces their poverty.
It’s a vicious circle, technically known as a poverty trap.
The UN Millennium Project’s Hunger Task Force, led by two world-leading scientists, M. S. Swaminathan and Pedro Sanchez, examined how to break this vicious circle.
The Hunger Task Force determined that Africa could substantially increase its food production if help was given to smallholder farmers, in the form of agricultural inputs.  The Millennium Project recommended a big increase in global funding for this purpose.  Drawing on that work and related scientific findings, Annan launched a call in 2004 for an African Green Revolution, based on an expanded partnership between Africa and donor countries.
Many of us, notably current UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, have worked hard to make this possible, with Ban repeatedly emphasizing the special emergency arising from the global food, financial, and energy crises of the past two years.
The G-8 announcement reflects these years of effort, and of course the boost from the leadership of US President Barack Obama, Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Zapatero, Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, World Bank President Robert Zoellick, European Commissioner Louis Michel, European Parliamentarian Thijs Berman, and others.
Now the key is to make this effort work.
The lessons of history are clear.
Getting seed and fertilizer to smallholder farmers at highly subsidized prices (or even free in some cases) will make a lasting difference.
Not only will food yields rise in the short term, but farm households will use their higher incomes and better health to accumulate all sorts of assets: cash balances, soil nutrients, farm animals, and their children’s health and education.
That boost in assets will, in turn, enable local credit markets, such as micro-finance, to begin operating.
Farmers will be able to buy inputs, either out of their own cash, or by borrowing against their improved creditworthiness.
A consensus has now been reached on the need to assist smallholders, but obstacles remain.
Perhaps the main risk is that the “aid bureaucracies” now trip over each other to try to get their hands on the $20 billion, so that much of it gets taken up by meetings, expert consultations, overhead, reports, and further meetings.
“Partnerships” of donors can become an expensive end in themselves, merely delaying real action.
If donor governments really want results, they should take the money out of the hands of thirty or more separate aid bureaucracies and pool it in one or two places, the most logical being the World Bank in Washington and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) in Rome.
One or both of these agencies would then have an account with several billion dollars.
Governments in hunger-stricken regions, especially Africa, would then submit national action plans that would provide details on how they would use the donor funds to get high-yield seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, farm tools, storage silos, and local advice to impoverished farmers.
An independent expert panel would review the national plans to verify their scientific and managerial coherence.
Assuming that a plan passes muster, the money to support it would quickly be disbursed.
Afterward, each national program would be monitored, audited, and evaluated.
This approach is straightforward, efficient, accountable, and scientifically sound.
Two major recent success stories in aid have used this approach: the Global Alliance on Vaccines and Immunizations, which successfully gets immunizations to young children, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria, which supports national action plans to battle these killer diseases.
Both have saved millions of lives during the past decade, and have paved the way to a new more efficient and scientifically sound method of development assistance.
Not surprisingly, many UN agencies and aid agencies in rich countries fight this approach.
All too often, the fight is about turf, rather than about the most effective way to speed help to the poor.
Obama, Rudd, Zapatero, and other forward-thinking leaders can therefore make a huge difference by following up on their pledges at the G-8 and insisting that the aid really works.
The bureaucracies must be bypassed to get help to where it is needed: in the soil tilled by the world’s poorest farm families.
A Black and White Question
NEW YORK – In the afternoon of July 16 two men appeared to be breaking into a fine house in an expensive area of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Alerted by a telephone call, a policeman arrived smartly on the scene.
He saw one black male standing inside the house and asked him to come out.
The man refused.
He was then told to identify himself.
The man, still refusing to step out, said he was a Harvard professor, showed his ID, and warned the cop not to mess with him.
He said something about black men in America being singled out, and asked the cop, who was white, for his name and identification.
The cop, joined by several colleagues, arrested the professor for disorderly conduct.
We now know that the professor had broken into his own home, with the help of his chauffeur, because the door was jammed. 
What was unusual here was not the cop’s heavy-handedness.
Most people in the US know that if you talk back to the police, they will get nasty very fast.
The fact that the man was black might or might not have made the cop go for his handcuffs even sooner than he might normally have done.
That, too, would not have been unusual.
What made this case special was that Henry Louis “Skip” Gates is one of the most celebrated professors in the country, famous for his books, his articles, and numerous television appearances.
He is a grandee, a mover and shaker in the academic and media world, a friend of President Barack Obama.
That is why he warned the cop, Sgt. James Crowley, a veteran of the Cambridge police force, not to mess with him.
Class and race overlap in the US.
In this instance, it is impossible to pry them apart.
Gates, deeply conscious, indeed a specialist of the terrible history of race relations in his country, instinctively assumed that he was a victim of prejudice.
From his words it appears that he was equally conscious of not getting the proper respect due to a distinguished Harvard professor and media celebrity.
As he put it to his daughter in an interview published online: “[Crowley] should have gotten out of there and said, ‘I’m sorry, sir, good luck.
Loved your [television] series—check with you later!’”
Alas, Sgt.Crowley had never heard of Professor Gates.
A local man whose brothers all serve in the police force, a sports fan, and an amateur basketball coach, Crowley does not move in the same social circles as Gates.
As it happens, the charges were duly dropped, and there the case might have rested if President Obama, tired and frustrated after weeks of fighting for his healthcare bill, had not weighed in on behalf of his “friend” Gates, and called the police “stupid.”
Both he and Gates then spoke of “learning” from the incident.
Gates might even be planning a television documentary on racial profiling.
One thing to be learned, if we didn’t know this already, is how close racial sensitivities are to the surface of US life, despite the election of a black president.
The complexities of black anger, white guilt, and of black, and white fear, are so vexed that most Americans prefer not to talk about race at all.
The field is too full of mines.
One of Obama’s great achievements is that he made it into a serious topic through the brilliance and subtlety of his rhetoric.
And there remains plenty to talk about: the grotesquely disproportionate number of black men in US prisons; the lack of educational opportunities in poor, mostly black areas; the appalling healthcare system; and the very real brutality used by police officers against blacks, who don’t have the privilege of a Harvard ID.
It is probably true that many white policemen, even if they are trained to avoid racial profiling, as Sgt. Crowley was, need to be convinced that a black man can be at home in one of the finer houses of Cambridge, or any other American city.
But is the Gates affair the right way to enter into this discussion?
One might argue that it
There is, however, a danger that it will have an adverse affect on the necessary national discussion about race.
By having made such a big issue out of what was in fact a relatively minor event Gates could be accused of trivializing much worse instances of abuse.
Indeed, we don’t even know for certain whether this was such an instance.
Crowley never mentioned the color of Gates’ skin.
There was no question of violence.
There were just very raw nerves and hypersensitivity to hints of disrespect, on the part of the professor, and of the cop.
Outrage about a professor who is not to be messed with is not the best way to discuss the plight of countless, poor, anonymous people, whom most of us find it too easy to ignore.
A Bomb in Every Reactor
BERLIN – Twenty-five years after the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl, the ongoing catastrophe at the Fukushima nuclear reactor in Japan has – it must be hoped – made clear once and for all that the purported blessings of the nuclear age are mere illusions: nuclear power is neither clean nor safe nor cheap.
Indeed, the opposite is true.
Nuclear power is saddled with three major unresolved risks: plant safety, nuclear waste, and, most menacing of all, the risk of military proliferation.
Moreover, the alternatives to nuclear energy – and to fossil fuels – are well known and technically much more advanced and sustainable.
Taking on nuclear risk is not a necessity; it is a deliberate political choice.
Fossil-fuel and nuclear energy belong to the technological utopias of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which were based on a belief in the innocence of the technologically feasible and on the fact that, at the time, only a minority of people worldwide, largely in the West, benefited from technological progress.
By contrast, the twenty-first century will be informed by the realization that the global ecosystem and its resources, which are indispensable for human survival, are finite, and that this implies an enduring responsibility to preserve what we have.
Meeting this imperative entails both an enormous technological challenge and an opportunity to redefine the meaning of modernity.
The energy future of nine billion people, which is what the world population will be in the middle of the century, lies neither in fossil fuels nor in nuclear energy, but in renewable energy sources and dramatic improvements in energy efficiency.
We already know this.
Why, then, do the most advanced countries, in particular, take on the risk of a mega-catastrophe by seeking to create energy from radioactive fission?
The answer, ultimately, doesn’t lie with any civilian use of nuclear energy, but first and foremost with its military applications.
The energy derived from splitting uranium and plutonium atoms was originally used for the ultimate weapon, the atomic bomb.
Being a nuclear power provides sovereign states with protection and prestige.
Even today, the Bomb divides the world into two classes: the few states have it, and the many that do not.
The old Cold War world order was based on the nuclear arms race between the two superpowers, the United States and Soviet Union.
To stop others from trying to become nuclear powers, which would have multiplied and spread the risk of nuclear confrontation, the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) was framed in the 1960’s.
To this day, it governs the relationships between the nuclear powers and the rest of the world, imposing renunciation on the have-nots and nuclear-disarmament obligations on the haves.
Of course, the NPT has repeatedly been violated or circumvented by states that never subscribed to it.
To this day, therefore, the risk remains that the number of nuclear powers will increase, particularly given small and medium powers’ hope to enhance their prestige and position in regional conflicts.
Iran is the most current example of this.
The nuclearization of these not-always-stable states threatens to make the regional conflicts of the twenty-first century much more dangerous, and will also substantially increase the risk that nuclear weapons eventually end up in the hands of terrorists.
Despite the NPT, a clear separation between civilian and military use of nuclear energy hasn’t always worked, or worked completely, because the NPT’s rules permit all signatory states to develop and use – under international supervision – all of the components of the nuclear fuel cycle for civilian purposes.
From here, then, all that is required to become a nuclear power are a few small technical steps and political leaders’ decision to take them.
This political power, not the requirements of energy policy, is what makes giving up nuclear energy so difficult.
As a rule, the path to nuclear-power status always begins with so-called “civilian” nuclear programs.
The supposed “civilian” nuclear ambitions of Iran have thus, for instance, led to a large number of such “civilian” programs in neighboring states.
Honni soit qui mal y pense!
And, of course, the reactions of the nuclear powers to the disaster at Fukushima will be watched and analyzed closely by the so-called “clandestine threshold countries.”
So how will the world – first and foremost, the main nuclear powers – react to the Fukushima disaster?
Will the tide truly turn, propelling the world towards nuclear disarmament and a future free of nuclear weapons?
Or will we witness attempts to downplay the calamity and return to business as usual as soon as possible?
Fukushima has presented the world with a far-reaching, fundamental choice.
It was Japan, the high-tech country par excellence (not the latter-day Soviet Union) that proved unable to take adequate precautions to avert disaster in four reactor blocks.
What, then, will a future risk assessment look like if significantly less organized and developed countries begin – with the active assistance of the nuclear powers – to acquire civilian nuclear-energy capabilities?
Any decision to continue as before would send an unambiguous message to the clandestine threshold countries that are secretly pursuing nuclear weapons: despite lofty rhetoric and wordy documents, the nuclear powers lack the political will to change course.
Were they to abandon nuclear energy, however, their epochal change of heart would constitute a seminal contribution to global nuclear security – and thus to the fight against nuclear proliferation.
A Born-Again CAP
WAGENINGEN, NETHERLANDS – Born in 1957, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is now more than 50 years old, and the European Commission is proposing what it calls a health check for its middle-aged child.
But superficial repairs will not meet the European Union’s future needs.
The CAP must be born again.
Work on its renewal is due to start now, with the completed project ready in 2013.
But a much more profound re-think is needed.
The CAP’s original aim was to provide a secure source of food for the six original member states of the Union, which were importers of food and sought a degree of self-sufficiency.
Good, healthy, and cheap food had to be accessible for all citizens.
Improved agricultural productivity would benefit rural areas and give farmers a comparative share in the Union’s growing wealth.
Instruments to achieve those objectives were developed, and food security was achieved.
The CAP quickly came to be seen as the jewel in the crown of the European project.
As the EU has evolved and expanded, food systems have become more complex, involving production, processing, supply-chain organization, and wholesale and retail distribution, with all of these involving new issues like health and the environment.
The use of land is also receiving more serious scrutiny.
A 1991 study by the Netherlands Scientific Council for Governmental Policy, entitled
Those figures were for an EU of 15 countries, so with today’s 27 members the possibilities are even greater.
A Dutch analysis of land use has shown that by employing the best technical and ecological means on the best available land, substantial gains could be made in food production.
So it is not surprising that the number of farmers needed has fallen substantially.
Viewed from the standpoint of food security and the wealth of rural areas, there is now an urgent need to revisit the CAP’s main instruments so that a new policy formula can be introduced.
Perverse subsidies must be removed and recent new ones favoring products such as bio-fuels reconsidered.
The
A simplified CAP would encourage cleaner, more productive, and efficient agriculture.
A side benefit for the EU’s standing in the world could be that the World Trade Organization’s stalled Doha negotiations could be restarted once farmers in developing countries are assured of getting a fair deal from Europe.
Moreover, the CAP’s role as a motor of political and social integration in Europe could be restored once renewed policies are in place.
But renewal of this sort cannot be left to global market forces, as the results might not necessarily benefit European agriculture and society.
If the market “misbehaves,” farmers could be reduced to poverty, leading to the neglect of large areas of Europe.
That is a real enough danger to which policymakers must give serious thought as they reform the CAP on the basis of the following five pillars.
1.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; The EU needs a knowledge and innovation policy that strengthens European agriculture’s competitiveness.
Such a policy has been successful in the Netherlands, substantially contributing to the development and power of the country’s agribusiness.
Ten of 21 branches of Dutch agribusiness, including horticultural seeds, ornamentals, seed potatoes, and veal, are among the top contributors to the national economy and the country’s trade balance.
In the EU as a whole, a policy directed toward research programs stimulating scientific excellence and greater coherence in the European knowledge system would greatly strengthen agriculture’s competitiveness and contribute to food security and sustainable development.
2.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Europe also needs a restructuring policy for land use.
Many structural improvement programs have been financed at the European level, but agricultural production and land use are not among them.
The development of an Agricultural Main Structure would compliment the European Ecological Main Structure.
Reforestation and the repair of natural ecosystems should also be part of a land use policy.
3.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A policy for European food systems would treat production, processing, distribution, logistics, and retailing in combination.
Consumption patterns and preferences are an integral part of such systems.
Preliminary studies by the European Science Foundation’s “Forward Look on European Food Systems” could prove useful in devising an EU-wide policy.
4.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Metropolitan agriculture in a rapidly urbanizing world can provide high-quality produce on small amounts of land.
It offers an answer to rising demand for healthy food with minimal environmental side effects.
5.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A new CAP should include a policy to safeguard Europe’s landscapes.
But a cultural heritage should not be maintained everywhere, nor should it ignore cost.
And it should not be a defensive policy of the sort that tends to concentrate on poor-quality land.
These five pillars involve drastic choices, but they will probably require less money from Europe’s taxpayers, not more.
They could make a real contribution to cleaner, more productive, and efficient farming and land use, while addressing social needs.
A Boycott Against Reason
“It could happen here” is the shorthand phrase frequently used for a variety of alarming hypothetical scenarios.
“How could this happen here?” was the question more pertinently asked in Great Britain recently, as its universities witnessed the unfolding of an all-too-real and perplexing action.
In early June, the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education (NATFHE), Britain’s largest academic union, with 67,000 members, passed a motion to sever ties with all Israeli professors and institutions of higher learning unless they publicly dissociate themselves from “continuing Israeli apartheid policies.”
The motion was subsequently revoked; but the fact that it was put forward at all is astonishing enough.
Indeed, the union’s call for a wholesale boycott contravened its most fundamental values: the principle of academic freedom, openness, and exchange; protection of research from state politics; and the fundamental right to free speech.
The motion implicitly adopted the yardstick of collective punishment and a distinctly McCarthyite tone, demanding a sort of “disloyalty oath” from Israeli academics.
What led scholars who are putatively the guardians of democratic freedoms to embrace measures so reminiscent of fascist and Stalinist tactics?
Unfortunately, the NATFHE effort is part of a larger phenomenon.
In 2005, the Association of University Teachers (AUT) called for a more limited boycott, singling out Bar Ilan and Haifa Universities for opprobrium.
Before that, a petition, signed by roughly 80 prominent British intellectuals and a few from other European countries, demanded the cessation of European Union funding for Israeli cultural projects and institutions.
These campaigns, encouraged by Palestinian groups and non-governmental organizations, have been accompanied by individual acts of professional ostracism, and an informal boycott of Israeli scholars, publications, and cultural projects already exists in some European circles.
Such developments suggest an advanced and deeply disturbing trend, whereby certain segments of the European intelligentsia are willing to violate their own beliefs in order to target one state for unique stigmatization; and whereby insidious and sometimes illegal forms of discrimination against that state’s citizens are increasingly seen as acceptable.
In a certain ideological mind-set


In the putatively “radical” interpretation, the relationship between Israel and the Palestinians is rarely seen as a conflict between two groups with sometimes tragically opposed interests.
Rather, the stubborn complexities of the situation are reduced to a stark struggle between absolute power and absolute powerlessness, the archetypal oppressor and archetypal oppressed.
The rhetoric applied to Israel becomes ever more extreme, and conducive to hatred.
Phrases like “apartheid state” and “Zionism is racism,” unthinkable in liberal discourse a few years ago, have become routine.
At the same time, the Palestinians become objects of romanticized identifications – one of the leaders of the NAFTHE motion was seen, prior to a meeting, draped in a Palestinian flag – and unwitting condescension.
They are seen as the last pure cause, the entirely innocent “Other,” unimplicated in their fate and apparently deprived of political agency or choice.
The possibility that the Palestinians are capable of deliberate decisions, that they have adopted policies which may have contributed to the current situation, or that they have exercised their own forms of power and violence, is, in this framework, never admitted.
Hamas was never mentioned in either of the university unions’ motions.
This is Manicheanism of the left, and, like Manicheanism of the political right, it can distort reality to the point of becoming divorced from it.
Certainly, the boycott efforts ignored basic facts.
Unless British academics are ill informed, they know that Israel, far from being an “apartheid state,” has a large proportion of Arab citizens; that Israeli universities are well integrated, in some cases with considerable numbers of Arab students, as well as a number – admittedly small and insufficiently representative – of Arab faculty; that many universities sponsor collaborative projects with Palestinian and Arab colleagues; that they are often sites of dissidence against government policies; and that such dissidence, even in radical forms, is tolerated.
Advocates of discriminatory measures often charge their opponents with stifling legitimate criticism of Israel.
This argument is both disingenuous and dishonest.
Many of the boycotts’ critics are also critical of Israel.
But credible criticism must be based on evidence – and on generally applicable criteria of judgment.
If the British unions wanted to be ethically consistent, they should apply the same strategies to universities in the numerous countries where human rights are brutally abused and free speech suppressed.
Some see this hostility to Israel as camouflaging old-fashioned anti-Semitism.
It is always risky to speculate about hidden motives; nevertheless, systematic disparagement of Israeli society and culture undoubtedly encourages the sense that anti-Semitism, too, is a permitted prejudice.
It is always easier to see a group or nation as a malevolent “Other” when this impulse is fed by an old, and still potent, prejudice.
There is a deeper issue at stake.
Democratic societies depend not only on the foundational principle of free speech, but on the character of political thought and conversation among various constituencies.
When the supposedly most enlightened and liberal of those constituencies resorts to illiberal discourse and intolerant measures, tendencies toward bigotry and ideological irrationality are reinforced.
The actions of the British academic unions have Israel as their obvious target.
But their main effect may be an erosion of reasoned debate and civil conduct, without which democracy is powerless against the forces of polarization and extremism.
A Breakthrough Against Hunger
NEW YORK – Today’s world hunger crisis is unprecedentedly severe and requires urgent measures.
Nearly one billion people are trapped in chronic hunger – perhaps 100 million more than two years ago.
Spain is taking global leadership in combating hunger by inviting world leaders to Madrid in late January to move beyond words to action.
With Spain’s leadership and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s partnership, several donor governments are proposing to pool their financial resources so that the world’s poorest farmers can grow more food and escape the poverty trap.
The benefits of some donor help can be remarkable.
Peasant farmers in Africa, Haiti, and other impoverished regions currently plant their crops without the benefit of high-yield seed varieties and fertilizers.
The result is a grain yield (for example, maize) that is roughly one-third less than what could be achieved with better farm inputs.
African farmers produce roughly one ton of grain per hectare, compared with more than four tons per hectare in China, where farmers use fertilizers heavily.
African farmers know that they need fertilizer; they just can’t afford it. With donor help, they can.
Not only do these farmers then feed their families, but they also can begin to earn market income and to save for the future.
By building up savings over a few years, the farmers eventually become creditworthy, or have enough cash to purchase vitally necessary inputs on their own.
There is now widespread agreement on the need for increased donor financing for small farmers (those with two hectares or less of land, or impoverished pastoralists), which is especially urgent in Africa.
The UN Secretary General led a steering group last year that determined that African agriculture needs around $8 billion per year in donor financing – roughly four times the current total – with a heavy emphasis on improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation systems, and extension training.
In addition to direct help for small farms, donors should provide more help for the research and development needed to identify new high-yielding seed varieties, especially to breed plants that can withstand temporary flooding, excess nitrogen, salty soils, crop pests, and other challenges to sustainable food production.
Helping the poor with today’s technologies, while investing in future improved technologies, is the optimum division of labor.
This investment pays off wonderfully, with research centers such as the International Rice Research Institute and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre providing the high-yield seeds and innovative farming strategies that together triggered the Asian Green Revolution.
These centers are not household names, but they deserve to be.
Their scientific breakthroughs have helped to feed the world, and we’ll need more of them.
Dozens of low-income, food-deficit countries, perhaps as many as 40-50, have elaborated urgent programs for increased food production by small farms, but are currently held back by the lack of donor funding.
These countries have appealed to the World Bank for financing, and the Bank made a valiant effort in 2008 to help through its new Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFCRP).
But the Bank does not yet have sufficient funds to meet these countries’ urgent needs, and has had to ration assistance to a small fraction of the flows that could be effectively and reliably used.
Hundreds of millions of people, in the meantime, remain trapped in hunger.
Many individual donor countries have declared that they are now prepared to increase their financial support for smallholder agriculture, but are searching for the appropriate mechanisms to do so.
The current aid structures are inadequate.
The more than 20 bilateral and multilateral donor agencies for agriculture are highly fragmented and of insufficient scale individually and collectively.
Despite the dedicated efforts of many professionals, the response to the hunger crisis remains utterly inadequate.
The 2008 planting seasons came and went with much too little additional help for impoverished small farmers.
African countries search endlessly, and mostly fruitlessly, for the small amounts of funding needed for their purchases of fertilizer and improved seeds.
My colleagues and I, serving on an advisory committee for the Spanish initiative, have recommended that donors pool their funds into a single international account, which we call the Financial Coordination Mechanism (FCM).
These pooled funds would enable farmers in poor countries to obtain the fertilizer, improved seed varieties, and small-scale irrigation equipment that they urgently need.
Poor countries would receive prompt and predictable financing for agricultural inputs from a single account, rather than from dozens of distinct and fragmented donors.
By pooling financial resources into a single-donor FCM, aid programs’ administrative costs could be kept low, the availability of aid flows could be assured, and poor countries would not have to negotiate 25 times in order to receive help. 
The time for business as usual is over.
The donors promised to double aid to Africa by 2010, but are still far off track.
Indeed, during the past 20 years, they actually cut aid for agriculture programs, and only now are reversing course.
Meanwhile, a billion people go hungry each day.
We need a breakthrough that is demonstrable, public, clear, and convincing, that can mobilize the public’s hearts and minds, and that can demonstrate success.
History can be made in Madrid at the end of January, when the world’s richest and poorest countries converge to seek solutions to the global hunger crisis.
The lives of the billion poorest people depend on it.
A Breakthrough Opportunity for Global Health
NEW YORK – Every year, millions of people die from preventable and treatable diseases, especially in poor countries.
In many cases, lifesaving medicines can be cheaply mass-produced, but are sold at prices that block access to those who need them.
And many die simply because there are no cures or vaccines, because so little of the world’s valuable research talent and limited resources is devoted to addressing the diseases of the poor.
This state of affairs represents a failure of economics and law that urgently needs to be corrected.
The good news is that there are now opportunities for change, most promisingly through an international effort headed by the World Health Organization that would begin to fix the broken intellectual-property regime that is holding back the development and availability of cheap drugs.
Two main problems limit the availability of medicines today.
One is that they are very costly; or, more accurately, the price charged for them is very high, though the cost of producing them is but a fraction of that amount.
Second, drug development is geared toward maximizing profit, not social benefit, which skews efforts directed at the creation of medicines that are essential to human welfare.
Because the poor have so little money to spend, drug companies, under current arrangements, have little incentive to do research on the diseases that afflict them.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
Drug companies argue that high prices are necessary to fund research and development.
But, in the United States, it is actually the government that finances most health-related research and development – directly, through public support (National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation), and indirectly, through public purchases of medicine, both in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Even the part that is not government-financed is not a conventional market; most individuals’ purchases of prescription medicines are covered by insurance.
Government finances health-care research because improved medicines are a public good.
The resulting knowledge benefits everyone by stopping epidemics and limiting the economic and human toll of widespread illness.
Efficiency requires sharing research as widely as possible as soon as it is available.
Thomas Jefferson compared knowledge to candles: when one is used to light another, it does not diminish the light of the first.
On the contrary, everything becomes brighter.
Yet, in America and most of the world, drug prices are still exorbitant and the spread of knowledge is tightly limited.
That is because we have created a patent system that gives innovators a temporary monopoly over what they create, which encourages them to hoard their knowledge, lest they help a competitor.
While this system does provide incentives for certain kinds of research by making innovation profitable, it allows drug companies to drive up prices, and the incentives do not necessarily correspond to social returns.
In the health-care sector, it may be more profitable to devote research to a “me-too” drug than to the development of a treatment that really makes a difference.
The patent system may even have adverse effects on innovation, because, while the most important input into any research is prior ideas, the patent system encourages secrecy.
A solution to both high prices and misdirected research is to replace the current model with a government-supported prize fund.
With a prize system, innovators are rewarded for new knowledge, but they do not retain a monopoly on its use.
That way, the power of competitive markets can ensure that, once a drug is developed, it is made available at the lowest possible price – not at an inflated monopoly price.
Fortunately, some US lawmakers are taking a strong interest in this approach.
The Prize Fund for HIV/AIDS Act, a congressional bill introduced by Senator Bernie Sanders, is just such an initiative.
His bill also contains an important provision aimed at encouraging open-source research, which would move the current research model away from secrecy toward sharing.
But, globally, our innovation system needs much bigger changes.
The WHO’s efforts to encourage broad reforms at the international level are crucial.
This spring, the WHO released a report that recommends solutions similar to those proposed in the US Senate bill, but on a global level.
Importantly, the report, “Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing Countries,” recommends a comprehensive approach, including mandatory funding contributions from governments for research on developing countries’ health needs; international coordination of health-care priorities and implementation; and a global observatory that would monitor where needs are greatest.
In late May, the international community will have a chance to begin implementing these ideas at the WHO World Health Assembly – a moment of hope for public health around the world.
Reforming our innovation system is not just a matter of economics.
It is, in many cases, a matter of life and death.
It is therefore essential to de-link R&amp;D incentives from drug prices, and to promote greater sharing of scientific knowledge.
For America, the Sanders bill marks important progress.
For the world, the WHO’s recommendations represent a once-in-a-generation opportunity to remedy a long-standing and egregious inequity in health care, and, more broadly, to set a model for governance of global public goods befitting an era of globalization.
We cannot afford to let this opportunity pass us by.
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50% in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece, is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable?
If so, does enlarging the euro’s membership really serve Europe’s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency.
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that, at least for large countries, currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders.
At a minimum, currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone.
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell’s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were, the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment.
He credited another (future) Nobel Prize winner, James Meade, for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work, but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently, especially in the context of Europe’s nascent integration.
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises, but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever.
Not surprisingly, workers are leaving the eurozone’s crisis countries, but not necessarily for its stronger northern region.
Instead, Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau.
Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania, which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain.
Still, if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell’s ideal, today we would not be seeing 25% unemployment in Spain while Germany’s unemployment rate is below 7%.
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union, which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration.
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960’s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber, a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk.
For a normal country, the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions.
In the US, when oil prices go up, incomes in Texas and Montana rise, which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget, thereby helping out the rest of the country.
Europe, of course, has no significant centralized tax authority, so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent.
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers, because any desired degree of risk sharing can, in theory, be achieved through financial markets.
This claim was hugely misguided.
Financial markets can be fragile, and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income, which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy.
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness.
But, in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels, the short term can stretch out for a very long time.
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube, much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century.
Indeed, more than 20 years on, Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification.
Later, Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that, in addition to fiscal transfers, a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort.
Otherwise, bank runs and debt panics will be rampant.
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks, but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities.
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld, and even of Mundell’s labor-mobility criterion, is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy, most likely involving region-wide popular elections.
Europe’s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework.
European policymakers today often complain that, were it not for the US financial crisis, the eurozone would be doing just fine.
Perhaps they are right.
But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks, including big ones.
Europe may never be an “optimum” currency area by any standard.
But, without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.
The Global Economy’s New Path
WASHINGTON, DC – Whether we like it or not, the world around us is in a state of constant change.
But recent economic trends suggest that this change may be shifting its direction in a fundamental way.
Consider the advanced economies.
During the last two decades, economic growth in these countries was led by consumption – so much so that economic activity in these economies swung from investment to consumption by a total of 10 percentage points of GDP.
As a result, in 2010 the share of consumption in their GDP had reached 81.6%.
1990
2010
(In percent of GDP)
Advanced economies
Consumption
76.4
81.6
Investment
23.7
18.4
Emerging and developing economies
Consumption
73.4
67.1
Investment
26.0
30.8
Meanwhile, emerging markets and developing economies provided almost a mirror image of this trend, raising their investment and boosting the supply of goods to the rest of the world at the cost of consumption in their own economies.
By 2010, the share of consumption in their GDP had declined, from 73.4% to 67.1%.
Looking forward, it is unlikely that the consumption share of GDP can increase further in advanced economies.
The main drivers of this increase were primarily financial engineering and wealth effects from strong asset prices.
Neither of these factors currently is at play to push consumption’s share of GDP higher.
But can the advanced economies’ consumption even be sustained at the current level?
Perhaps not.
Current levels of consumption are associated with over-extended governments and households, whose debt levels remain high, implying that more savings are required.
Banks also need to raise capital.
In general, many economic agents need an extended period of deleveraging.
However, current policies in the major advanced economies are aimed at maintaining current consumption levels in order to support growth and employment.
If the consumption share of GDP nonetheless declines, simple arithmetic tells us that investment and exports need to be higher to maintain total demand.
Should we expect emerging markets and developing economies to pick up the slack?
To sustain strong growth in these economies as external demand weakens, domestic demand needs to become the major engine of growth.
This means stronger domestic consumption and appropriate levels of investment to support such consumption growth.
In economies where investment levels are leading to excess capacity, resources could shift from investment to consumption, provided that these countries’ external accounts remain sustainable.
These are major tectonic shifts in the structure of the global economy, and are fraught with potential dangers.
The pace of change will vary between sectors and across economies, leading to mismatches of demand and supply worldwide.
Moreover, with globalization, an economic problem in one part of the world can be transmitted to the rest of the world more strongly, substantially complicating policy responses in both advanced and developing economies.
A study of such spillover effects by the International Monetary Fund suggests that, before the global financial crisis, external factors explained 36% of change in output in the five systemically important economies (the eurozone, the United States, China, Japan, and the United Kingdom); after the crisis, however, this share reached close to 60%.
In the rest of the world, including emerging markets, the share of external factors in output change increased from about 43% to more than 60%.