$10,000 Gold?
SAN FRANCISCO – It has never been easy to have a rational conversation about the value of gold.
Lately, with gold prices up more than 300% over the last decade, it is harder than ever.
Just last December, fellow economists Martin Feldstein and Nouriel Roubini each penned op-eds bravely questioning bullish market sentiment, sensibly pointing out gold’s risks.
Wouldn’t you know it?
Since their articles appeared, the price of gold has moved up still further. Gold prices even hit a record-high $1,300 recently.
Last December, many gold bugs were arguing that the price was inevitably headed for $2,000.
Now, emboldened by continuing appreciation, some are suggesting that gold could be headed even higher than that.
One successful gold investor recently explained to me that stock prices languished for a more than a decade before the Dow Jones index crossed the 1,000 mark in the early 1980’s.
Since then, the index has climbed above 10,000.
Now that gold has crossed the magic $1,000 barrier, why can’t it increase ten-fold, too?
Admittedly, getting to a much higher price for gold is not quite the leap of imagination that it seems.
After adjusting for inflation, today’s price is nowhere near the all-time high of January 1980. Back then, gold hit $850, or well over $2,000 in today’s dollars.
But January 1980 was arguably a “freak peak” during a period of heightened geo-political instability.
At $1,300, today’s price is probably more than double very long-term, inflation-adjusted, average gold prices.
So what could justify another huge increase in gold prices from here?
One answer, of course, is a complete collapse of the US dollar.
With soaring deficits, and a rudderless fiscal policy, one does wonder whether a populist administration might recklessly turn to the printing press.
And if you are really worried about that, gold might indeed be the most reliable hedge.
Sure, some might argue that inflation-indexed bonds offer a better and more direct inflation hedge than gold.
But gold bugs are right to worry about whether the government will honor its commitments under more extreme circumstances.
In fact, as Carmen Reinhart and I discuss in our recent book on the history of financial crises, This Time is Different, cash-strapped governments will often forcibly convert indexed debt to non-indexed debt, precisely so that its value might be inflated away.
Even the United States abrogated indexation clauses in bond contracts during the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
So it can happen anywhere.
Even so, the fact that very high inflation is possible does not make it probable, so one should be cautious in arguing that higher gold prices are being driven by inflation expectations.
Some have argued instead that gold’s long upward march has been partly driven by the development of new financial instruments that make it easier to trade and speculate in gold.
There is probably some slight truth – and also a certain degree of irony – to this argument.
After all, medieval alchemists engaged in what we now consider an absurd search for ways to transform base metals into gold.
Wouldn’t it be paradoxical, then, if financial alchemy could make an ingot of gold worth dramatically more?
In my view, the most powerful argument to justify today’s high price of gold is the dramatic emergence of Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East into the global economy.
As legions of new consumers gain purchasing power, demand inevitably rises, driving up the price of scarce commodities.
At the same time, emerging-market central banks need to accumulate gold reserves, which they still hold in far lower proportion than do rich-country central banks.
With the euro looking less appetizing as a diversification play away from the dollar, gold’s appeal has naturally grown.
So, yes, there are solid fundamentals that arguably support today’s higher gold price, although it is far more debatable whether and to what extent they will continue to support higher prices in the future.
Indeed, another critical fundamental factor that has been sustaining high gold prices might prove far more ephemeral than globalization.
Gold prices are extremely sensitive to global interest-rate movements.
After all, gold pays no interest and even costs something to store.
Today, with interest rates near or at record lows in many countries, it is relatively cheap to speculate in gold instead of investing in bonds.
But if real interest rates rise significantly, as well they might someday, gold prices could plummet.
Most economic research suggests that gold prices are very difficult to predict over the short to medium term, with the odds of gains and losses being roughly in balance.
It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends.
Yes, gold has had a great run, but so, too, did worldwide housing prices until a couple of years ago.
If you are a high-net-worth investor, a sovereign wealth fund, or a central bank, it makes perfect sense to hold a modest proportion of your portfolio in gold as a hedge against extreme events.
But, despite gold’s heightened allure in the wake of an extraordinary run-up in its price, it remains a very risky bet for most of us.
Of course, such considerations might have little influence on prices.
What was true for the alchemists of yore remains true today: gold and reason are often difficult to reconcile.
Is Iraq the Next Afghanistan?
At the onset of the US-led war in Iraq, two competing views shaped predictions about the outcome. The first contended that overthrowing Saddam Hussein's regime would usher in a democratic era in Iraq that would serve as a model and catalyst for democratic change regionally.
Derided by detractors as a new "domino theory," this view presented intervention in Iraq as similar to America's role in post-WWII Japan.
Against the optimism of that "Japan scenario," pessimists argued that a "Somalia scenario" was more likely.
They staked their claim on the tribal, sectarian, and multiethnic nature of Iraq, which, in the absence of dictatorship, would supposedly incite Iraq's collapse into a "failed state," with rampant warlordism, ethnic and religious feuds, and harboring of terrorist organizations.
But the main question now is whether Iraq will drift along lines somewhere between these two scenarios, increasingly resembling Afghanistan.
This "Afghan scenario" implies a weak state with nominal power over effectively autonomous fiefdoms that are headed by strongmen who are represented in the central government.
Bad as it sounds, this prospect appears to be a "realistic" compromise between the supposedly utopian vision of a flourishing, unified democracy and the wretchedness of a failed state.
Many of the actions and policies of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), as well as higher-level Bush administration decisions, seem to point to a resigned acceptance that early hopes that Iraq would embrace Western-style democracy were misplaced.
Indeed, such hopes were misplaced.
Iraq's political culture - and that of most of the Middle East - is incompatible with the basic components of a recognizable Western-style democracy: notions of individual rights and responsibilities are lacking, the concept of a patriarchal state is deeply rooted, and individual cultural identity is rarely tied to the national community.
On the other hand, much circular logic figures in analyses that consider the "traditional" nature of Iraqi society an obstacle to liberal democracy.
For these analyses are hardly neutral, but unwittingly enter an ongoing confrontation.
In Iraq, as elsewhere in the Arab and Muslim worlds, a cultural war is being waged between two paradigms: grand narratives that accept and promote a collectivistic understanding (nationalism, socialism, Islamism), versus an implicit paradigm of individualistic modernity that is locally rooted yet informed by the global experience.
The frontlines of this war are notions of the individual, cultural identity, civil society, and the nation-state.
The religious Islamic component in Iraqi social life should not be underestimated. But it also should not be equated with the political Islamism that strives to capitalize on it.
Nationalist and leftist political discourses did leave an imprint on the Iraqi value system, but they are not its sole components.
Indeed, the nominal acceptance of grand narratives of "democracy" and "human rights" as common bases for political discourse represents a crucial shift in demarcating the cultural battle.
This cultural debate is not limited to the Arab scene.
There are also vigorous discussions in the West about the applicability of democratic institutions to the Arab context.
Advocates of the notion of "Arab exceptionalism," which questions the ability of Arab societies to adapt democratic systems are in fact objectively allied with "grand narrative" ideologues - and also with the beneficiaries of the Arab world's patronage-based political order.
The models used in the West, both in political circles and in academia, for the analysis and interpretation of Arab societies are seriously deficient.
In particular, many analyses nowadays promote an ethnic model, reducing Iraq to an artificial construct that rests atop a fragmented "reality" of separate communities.
Some have even suggested hastening the outcome predicted by this faulty view by dividing Iraq into its "genuine" original components: Sunni, Shi`i, and Kurd.
In fact, Iraqi society is more complex than this.
The reception and adoption of democracy is not a function of sectarian belonging, but a reflection of the multi-dimensional historical, cultural, religious, and political identities of Iraqi individuals.
Given the right circumstances, it is eminently possible to mobilize Iraqi society towards a democratic formulation of its state-to-be.
The fall of Saddam ushers in the right circumstances.
Indeed, the seeming failure of a recognizable democratic core to emerge in Iraq within the first few months of the collapse of Saddam's dictatorship is due more to idiosyncrasies of the process than to any presumed essential nature of Iraqi society.
Upon Saddam's fall, a large "middle ground" existed in Iraq that was positively disposed towards democratic discourse and practice.
Policy mistakes and reversals eroded this middle ground, opening a path for ideological Islamism and a reconstituted neo-Ba`athism.
The key mistake was the failure of occupation forces to equip and empower the small group of Iraqi liberal democratic figures to tap into this middle ground.
As a result, the space for a liberal democratic outcome receded.
But to treat this setback as a failure would be a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Iraqi democrats must re-assess and develop a clear public strategy.
The CPA, and the world community, must not prejudice the outcome of their efforts by accepting a facile and bogus view of Iraqi society.
Even if such efforts succeed, the road to a full-fledged democratic system in Iraq will still be arduous and expensive.
But instead of succumbing to a "Somalia scenario," dreaming of a "Japan scenario," or settling for an "Afghanistan scenario," Iraq may yet become a "scenario" for successful intervention in the 21 st century.
“Neo-Ottoman” Turkey?
ANKARA – Nowadays, the international media are obsessed with the question of who “lost” Turkey and what that supposed loss means for Europe and the West.
More alarmingly, some commentators liken Turkey’s neighborhood policy to a revival of Ottoman imperialism.
Recently, a senior Turkish columnist went so far as to quote Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu as saying that “we are indeed neo-Ottoman.”
As someone who was present when Davutoğlu made his presentation to the parliamentary faction of Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), I can attest to the fact that he did not use such terminology.
In fact, Davutoğlu and all of us in the AKP foreign-policy community never use this term, because it is simply a mispresentation of our position.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is devised to reintegrate Turkey into its immediate neighborhoods, including the Balkans, the Black Sea, the Caucasus, the Middle East, and the Eastern Mediterranean.
We aim to deepen our political dialogue, increase our trade, and multiply our people-to-people contacts with our neighbors in the form of sports, tourism, and cultural actvities.
When Egon Bahr formulated his Ostpolitik in the 1960’s, no one asked Will Brandt whether Germany was lost.
God bestowed upon Turkey a geographical position that fundamentally requires for us to engage with East and West, North and South.
This is neither a choice nor a luxury – it is a necessity.
The symbol of the Byzantine and the Selçuk Empires, which occupied roughly the same geography that Turkey does today, was a double-headed eagle looking both east and west.
It should be no wonder that Turkey is also seeking to engage both ends of its territories and feels that its security is best consolidated by minimizing risks together with its neighbors.
So we find the current debate on Turkey’s orientation rather superflous, and in some cases ill-intentioned.
Our neighborhood policy needs support, not criticism.
Turkey has become an invaluable asset in the make-up of our surrounding regions, and is already changing the status quo in favor of more stability and predictability.
Our efforts at normalization with Armenia, for example, are destined to bring change to the entire South Caucasus.
We are doing our part in terms of burden-sharing.
Sensible Europeans understand that.
To be sure, some of our neighbors are difficult.
But no country has the luxury of choosing its neighbors.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is very realistic, based on genuine interests, not some romantic neo-Ottoman nostagia, as more than a few international commentators have suggested.
True, there is a neo-Ottoman revival in the cultural field, and our citizens are eager to rediscover Ottoman life, culture, and practices.
As Turkey is normalizing domestically, it is also reinterpreting its national historical narrative.
This is a natural byproduct of consolidating our democracy.
However, trying to paint our carefully constructed foreign-policy initiatives with imperialist overtones is not only a stark mispresentation, but also does gross injustice to our well-intentioned efforts to stabilize our region.
In Roman mythology, Janus was the god of gates, doorways, beginnings, and endings.
Turkey today is a Janus-like geography that offers gates and doorways to the East and West.
It offers beginnings and endings to the Caucasus, the Black Sea, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean.
In this capacity, Turkey complements and contributes to a unique transitional passage between otherwise difficult regions, for it signifies centuries-old co-existence and adjustment.
Turkish foreign policy contributes to that coming together and helps its immeditate neighborhoods to connect with one another.
Contrary to recent charges, Turkey’s foreign policymakers are not seeking to revive the Ottoman Empire.
Instead, we seek Turkey’s historic reintegration into its immediate neighborhoods, thereby correcting an anomaly of the Cold War years.
Such re-integration would only benefit the European Union and our other Western, NATO allies.
None of them, therefore, has any reason to express discomfort with Turkey.
Why Wait for the Euro?
Although the EU's eastward enlargement has not yet happened, the debate is already shifting to ask what will follow: when should the new, predominantly postcommunist, members adopt the euro?
Assuming that they comply with the Maastricht Treaty's provisions concerning the EMU - and are not unfairly held to more stringent criteria - the core issue is whether new members would benefit more by waiting or whether they should seek early entry. 
At the outset, it must be stressed that, in seeking earlier entry into the EMU a country assumes a more ambitious fiscal and structural program than would be needed if EMU membership is delayed.
Early entry, otherwise, would be an empty gesture. 
I believe that early adoption of the euro is not only possible, but preferable to delay.
By early adoption I mean the shortest permissible period of time - two years - following a new member subordinating its monetary policy to the fiscal and monetary constraints of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II).
Assuming entry into both the EU and ERM II in 2004, new members should aim to enter the eurozone around 2006. 
Is this realistic?
Well, most candidate countries have already achieved a high degree of structural convergence with the EU.
Exports to the Union have soared since 1991, when the collapse of the Soviet-era COMECON trading system forced a radical reorientation of trade - helped by massive foreign investment from the EU - towards Western markets.
Most accession candidates now send more exports to the EU than Greece, Portugal, and Spain did when they entered the EU and EMU. 
Progress on disinflation is similarly impressive.
Annual inflation in most candidate countries has fallen to 4-5% - not much higher than in many EU countries, and lower than in The Netherlands last year.
As with structural convergence, EU candidates already outperform Spain, Portugal, and Greece at a comparable time before their EMU debut.
Nor is there much risk of large, future corrective price swings because all but a few prices are completely liberalized. 
Theoretical studies suggest that inflation in the accession countries will remain stubbornly higher than the Maastricht Treaty allows.
The culprit in this pessimistic view is the so-called "Balassa-Samuelson" effect: rapid productivity growth in the accession candidates' tradable sectors - export manufacturing, for example - is pushing up real wages throughout their economies, including in non-tradable sectors like services.
This overall rise in real wages in the face of lower productivity growth for the service sector boosts relative prices and keeps inflation above the eurozone average. 
The Balassa-Samuelson effect is still evident in Greece, Spain and Portugal.
But as empirical research prepared by the CEC5 National Banks estimates, its contribution to total price growth in the candidate countries is 1-2%.
With the Balassa-Samuelson effect so subdued and limited scope for future corrective inflation, the EMU criterion regarding price stability - of annual inflation within 1.5% of the average rate for the three best-performing economies in the EU - is within reach. 
But is early admission to EMU preferable to postponing membership?
From the standpoint of current member states, would admitting Hungary, Latvia, Poland, or Slovakia, sooner rather than later, drag down the euro as many fear? 
Fears that extending EMU to new states "too soon" would undermine the euro's external exchange rate are irrational.
If all candidate countries join the EU at around the same time, they will together account for a mere 6% of its total GDP.
So any negative impact on the euro from rapid accession to EMU would at worst amount to little more than a rounding error. 
Delaying entry into EMU could make sense if a longer wait produced more information.
But a wait of greater length might produce nothing but added noise.
Equally, the transition period is already turbulent, with convergence-driven capital flows driving up exchange rates and complicating monetary policy in several candidate countries, including Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary.
Indeed, capital-flow volatility could make short work of the flexible exchange rate on offer under ERM II - a 15% fluctuation band either side of a central parity. 
Some argue that ERM II membership should be viewed as a longer-term proposition - possibly lasting until 2010 - for the benefit of candidates themselves.
The benefit is simple: ERM II permits some exchange rate flexibility, as opposed to the fixed rates implied by adopting the euro.
This would help keep the candidates' economic output high and thus sustain real convergence with average EU income levels. 
This is an exceptionally weak argument, and a politically suspect one, too.
As European Central Bank data shows, average per capita GDP in the accession candidates is 44% of the eurozone level.
The size of the income gap combines with the small growth differentials to imply that the process of real convergence will extend far beyond even the most cautious dates for EU and EMU entry, probably lasting several decades.
More important, long-lasting economic growth does not depend on the type of exchange rate - whether flexible or fixed (EMU) - while early accession will speed up crucial reforms. 
A few years of limited exchange rate flexibility is a poor substitute for rapid completion of structural reforms.
In almost all candidates, further disinflation and long-term economic growth require fiscal consolidation, more flexible labor markets, and completion of privatization.
Delaying EMU entry risks weakening the incentive to complete these politically costly but necessary reforms. 
Any delay in completing reforms will ultimately slow the process of real convergence that EU officials rightly hold dear.
Early adoption, by contrast, would be more conducive to these reforms, and thus to real convergence.
Success here would allow candidate countries to start reaping the benefits of greater price transparency, reduced transaction costs, and a solid macroeconomic framework.
This strategy, not one of deferred entry, promises the most for both the EU's current and its future members. 
1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades.
The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity. By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
The End of 1945
NEW YORK – On May 8, 1945, when World War II in Europe officially ended, much of the world lay in ruins.
But if the human capacity for destruction knows few limits, the ability to start over again is just as remarkable.
Perhaps that is why mankind has so far managed to survive.
No doubt, millions of people at the end of the war were too hungry and exhausted to do anything much beyond staying alive.
But, at the same time, a wave of idealism swept across the wreckage, a collective sense of determination to build a more equal, peaceful, and safer world.
That is why the war’s great hero, Winston Churchill, was voted out of office in the summer of 1945, even before Japan surrendered.
Men and women had not risked their lives simply to return to the old days of class privilege and social deprivation.
They wanted better housing, education, and free health care for all.
Similar demands were heard all over Europe, where the anti-Nazi or anti-fascist resistance was often led by leftists, or indeed Communists, and prewar conservatives were frequently tainted by collaboration with fascist regimes.
There was talk of revolution in countries such as France, Italy, and Greece.
This did not happen, because neither the Western Allies nor the Soviet Union supported it.
Stalin was content to settle for an empire in Eastern Europe.
But even Charles de Gaulle, a resistance leader of the right, had to accept Communists in his first postwar government, and he agreed to nationalize industries and banks.
The swing to the left, to social-democratic welfare states, occurred all over Western Europe.
It was part of the 1945 consensus.
A different kind of revolution was taking place in Europe’s former colonies in Asia, where native peoples had no desire to be ruled once more by Western powers, which had been so ignominiously defeated by Japan.
Vietnamese, Indonesians, Filipinos, Burmese, Indians, and Malays wanted their freedom, too.
These aspirations were often voiced in the United Nations, founded in 1945.
The UN, like the dream of European unity, was also part of the 1945 consensus.
For a short while, many prominent people – Albert Einstein, for one – believed that only a world government would be able to ensure global peace.
This dream quickly faded when the Cold War divided the world into two hostile blocs.
But in some ways the 1945 consensus, in the West, was strengthened by Cold War politics.
Communism, still wrapped in the laurel leaf of anti-fascism, had a wide intellectual and emotional appeal, not only in the so-called Third World, but also in Western Europe.
Social democracy, with its promise of greater equality and opportunities for all, served as an ideological antidote.
Most social democrats were in fact fiercely anti-communist.
Today, 70 years later, much of the 1945 consensus no longer survives.
Few people can muster great enthusiasm for the UN.
The European dream is in crisis.
And the post-war social-democratic welfare state is being eroded more and more every day.
The rot began during the 1980s, under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
Neoliberals attacked the expense of entitlement programs and the vested interests of trade unions.
Citizens, it was thought, had to become more self-reliant; government welfare programs were making everyone soft and dependent.
In Thatcher’s famous words, there was no such thing as “society,” only families and individuals who ought to be taking care of themselves.
But the 1945 consensus was dealt a much greater blow precisely when we all rejoiced at the collapse of the Soviet Empire, the other great twentieth-century tyranny.
In 1989, it looked as if the dark legacy of World War II, the enslavement of Eastern Europe, was finally over.
And in many ways, it was.
But much else collapsed with the Soviet model.
Social democracy lost its raison d’être as an antidote to Communism.
All forms of leftist ideology – indeed, everything that smacked of collective idealism – came to be viewed as misguided utopianism that could lead only to the Gulag.
Neoliberalism filled the vacuum, creating vast wealth for some people, but at the expense of the ideal of equality that had emerged from World War II.
The extraordinary reception of Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century shows how keenly the consequences of the collapse of the left have been felt.
In recent years, other ideologies have also emerged to fill the human need for collective ideals.
The rise of right-wing populism reflects revived yearnings for pure national communities that keep immigrants and minorities out.
And, perversely, American neo-conservatives have transformed the internationalism of the old left by seeking to impose a democratic world order by US military force.
The answer to these alarming developments is not nostalgia.
We cannot simply return to the past.
Too much has changed.
But a new aspiration toward social and economic equality, and international solidarity, is badly needed.
It cannot be the same as the 1945 consensus, but we would do well, on this anniversary, to remember why that consensus was forged in the first place.
What Failed in 2008?
BERKELEY – To solve a problem, it is not enough to know what to do.
You actually have to implement the solution – and be willing to change course if it turns out that you did not know quite as much as you thought.
That is the message of two recent books that, together, tell you everything you need to know about the 2008 financial crisis: what caused it, what can be done to prevent it from recurring, and why those things have yet to be done.
The first book is The Shifts and the Shocks, by the conservative British journalist Martin Wolf, who begins by cataloguing the major shifts that set the stage for the economic disaster that continues to shape the world today.
His starting point is the huge rise in wealth among the world’s richest 0.1% and 0.01% and the consequent pressure for people, governments, and companies to take on increasingly unsustainable levels of debt.
Meanwhile, policymakers were lulled into complacency by the widespread acceptance of economic theories such as the “efficient-market hypothesis,” which assumes that investors act rationally and use all available information when making their decisions.
As a result, markets were deregulated, making it easier to trade assets that were perceived to be safe, but were in fact not.
As a result, systemic risk proliferated beyond central bankers’ wildest imagination.
Untested – and ultimately incorrect – assumptions created a policymaking environment defined by what can only be called hubris.
Officials underestimated tail risks.
They set inflation targets at around 2% – leaving little room for maneuver when the water got choppy.
And, most audaciously of all, the European Union introduced the euro as a common currency.
Indeed, wrongheaded policymaking continued long after the crisis began.
Politicians responded to worsening economic conditions by hewing as closely as possible to failed prescriptions, making sure to do no more than absolutely necessary to address the biggest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
Wolf’s prescription for countering the crisis is simple, smart, and unassailable.
In the short term, he suggests that countries with reserve currencies spend more (especially to finance public-sector investments) and issue more debt.
Their central banks, he argues, should raise inflation targets to 3% or even 4% per year.
Over the medium term, according to Wolf, countries need to put in place regulatory measures that lower debt levels and discourage overleveraging.
The eurozone, too, must resolve its internal contradictions, either by disbanding or by introducing “a minimum set of institutions and policies” that allow the monetary union to function properly.
Wolf’s long-term solutions include tackling inequality, “more global regulation,” a greater degree of “freedom for individual countries to craft their own responses,” and economic analysis that is less in thrall to the free-market ideologues that led us into the crisis in the first place.
And yet, as recommendable as Wolf’s proposals may be, little has been done to implement them.
The reasons why are found in the second book: Hall of Mirrors, by&nbsp;my friend, teacher, and patron, Barry Eichengreen.
Eichengreen traces our tepid response to the crisis to the triumph of monetarist economists, the disciples of Milton Friedman, over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers – at least when it comes to interpretations of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
When the 2008 financial crisis erupted, policymakers tried to apply Friedman’s proposed solutions to the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, this turned out to be the wrong thing to do, as the monetarist interpretation of the Great Depression was, to put it bluntly, wrong in significant respects and radically incomplete.
The resulting policies were enough to prevent the post-2008 recession from developing into a full-blown depression; but that partial success turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory, for it allowed politicians to declare that the crisis had been overcome, and that it was time to embrace austerity and focus on structural reform.
The result is today’s stagnant economy, marked by anemic growth that threatens to become the new normal.
The United States and Europe are on track to have thrown away 10% of their potential wealth, while the failure to strengthen financial-sector regulation has left the world economy exposed to the risk of another major crisis.
Wolf and Eichengreen would agree that the main shortcomings that led to the 2008 financial crisis – and that continue to underpin our inadequate response to it – are intellectual.
Indeed, the only true lesson of the crisis so far seems to be that its lessons will never truly be learned.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers.
And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
9/11 in Perspective
NEW YORK – It was a decade ago that 19 terrorists took control of four planes, flew two into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon with a third, and crashed the fourth in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers resisted and made it impossible for the terrorists to complete their malevolent mission.
In a matter of hours, more than 3,000 innocent people, mostly Americans, but also people from 115 other countries, had their lives suddenly and violently taken from them.
September 11, 2001, was a terrible tragedy by any measure, but it was not a historical turning point.
It did not herald a new era of international relations in which terrorists with a global agenda prevailed, or in which such spectacular terrorist attacks became commonplace.
On the contrary, 9/11 has not been replicated.
Despite the attention devoted to the “Global War on Terrorism,” the most important developments of the last ten years have been the introduction and spread of innovative information technologies, globalization, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the political upheavals in the Middle East. 
As for the future, it is much more likely to be defined by the United States’ need to put its economic house in order; China’s trajectory within and beyond its borders; and the ability of the world’s governments to cooperate on restoring economic growth, stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, and meeting energy and environmental challenges.
It is and would be wrong to make opposition to terrorism the centerpiece of what responsible governments do in the world.
Terrorists continue to be outliers with limited appeal at best.
They can destroy but not create.
It is worth noting that the people who went into the streets of Cairo and Damascus calling for change were not shouting the slogans of Al Qaeda or supporting its agenda.
Moreover, measures have been implemented to push back, successfully, against terrorists.
Intelligence assets have been redirected.
Borders have been made more secure and societies more resilient.
International cooperation has increased markedly, in part because governments that cannot agree on many things can agree on the need to cooperate in this area.
Military force has played a role as well.
Al Qaeda lost its base in Afghanistan when the Taliban government that had provided it sanctuary was ousted from power.
Osama bin-Laden was finally found and killed by US Special Forces in the suburbs of Islamabad.
Drones – unmanned aircraft that are remotely steered – have proven to be effective in killing a significant number of terrorists, including many of the most important leaders.
Weak governments can be made stronger; governments that tolerate or support terrorism must be held accountable.
But progress is not to be confused with victory.
Terrorists and terrorism cannot be eliminated any more than we can rid the world of disease.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent men, women, and children in pursuit of political goals.
Indeed, terrorists are advancing in some areas.
Pakistan remains a sanctuary for Al Qaeda and some of the world’s other most dangerous terrorists.
A mixture of instability, government weakness, and ideology in countries such as Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Nigeria are providing fertile territory for terrorists to organize, train, and mount operations – much as they did in Afghanistan did a decade ago.
New groups constantly emerge from the ruins of old ones.
There is also a growing danger of homegrown terrorism.
We have seen it in Great Britain and the US.
The Internet, one of the great inventions of the modern Western world, has shown itself to be a weapon that can be used to incite and train those who wish to cause harm to that world.
The question raised in October 2003 by then US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is no less relevant today: “Are we capturing, killing, or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrassas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training, and deploying against us?” All things being equal, we probably are.
But even small terrorist successes are costly in terms of lives, money, and making open societies less so.
What is to be done?
Alas, there is no single or silver bullet.
The establishment of a Palestinian state will not be enough for those terrorists who want to see the elimination of the Jewish state, any more than reaching a compromise over Kashmir will satisfy those Pakistan-based terrorists with bigger agendas vis-à-vis India.
Reducing unemployment is desirable, of course, but many terrorists do not come from poverty.
Helping to make societies in the Middle East and elsewhere more democratic might reduce the alienation that can lead to radicalism and worse, but this is easier said than done.
Of course, we want to continue to find ways to make ourselves less vulnerable and terrorists more so.
But what may be most important, particularly in the Arab and Islamic communities, is to end any acceptance of terrorism.
The Nigerian father who warned the US embassy in Lagos that he feared what his own son might do – before that same young man attempted to detonate a bomb aboard a flight to Detroit on Christmas Day 2009 – is an example of just this.
Only when more parents, teachers, and community leaders behave likewise will recruitment of terrorists dry up and law-enforcement authorities receive full cooperation from the populations they police.
Terrorism must lose its legitimacy among those who have historically supported or tolerated it before it will lose its potency.
A “Portfolio” Approach to Climate Change
The world has tried with little success to cut carbon emissions under the Kyoto Protocol.
The enormous effort expended to bring the Protocol into force nonetheless indicates how much work will be required to produce the next treaty, due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December 2009.
Campaigners will push for tough and far-reaching policies, but strong resistance will continue from countries concerned about their economic vitality.
The new negotiations will have one advantage over the earlier efforts, because governments now understand the need for a portfolio of adaptation, mitigation, and research efforts.
New research that my colleagues and I undertook for the Copenhagen Consensus Center in Denmark explores the effectiveness of different responses to this global challenge, but it strongly supports the portfolio approach for several reasons.
First, we now know that adaptation will be essential, because temperatures will rise by another 0.6°C by 2100 even if greenhouse gas emissions are eliminated tomorrow.
We also know that the impact of climate change will not be evenly distributed across the globe.
In some areas, modestly warmer temperatures could produce higher crop yields if associated changes in precipitation patterns are not adverse and/or irrigation remains viable.
Even with 0.6°C warming, however, Africa and South Asia will experience almost immediate reductions in the viability of many crops and, eventually, increased vulnerability to infectious disease.
These impacts will clearly hit the planet’s worst-off inhabitants hardest: the “bottom billion” who already bear the heaviest burden of disease, poverty, conflict and malnutrition.&#160;
Ensuring that adaptive capacity is expanded and exploited where it is most needed is thus a key challenge.
Long-term development may give countries more capacity to soften the impact of climate change on the environment and citizens’ health, but in the meantime the planet’s poorest people will need help from the rich.
Our analysis investigated, for example, the merits of more targeted policies for the near term: purchasing mosquito-resistant bed nets and oral re-hydration malaria therapy for children in the poorest nations affected by climate change.
The goal was to deal aggressively and proactively with some of the marginal health impacts of global warming.
Benefits would appear almost immediately, but would dissipate over time as economies developed.
Even as development improves conditions, however, reducing carbon emissions would become increasingly important over the longer term as the impact of climate change become more severe.
Since the effects of climate change have been observed in many areas around the world, thinking about mitigation makes sense everywhere.
But we found that mitigation
The Copenhagen Consensus study also examined a portfolio option of the sort heralded by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
We allocated $50 billion to research into greener technology, so that only $750 billion could be absorbed by the economic cost of adaptation and mitigation.
The gap between the cost of carbon-free and carbon-emitting technology fell, and the taxes designed to mitigate emissions became more effective.
As a result, the research and development program essentially paid for itself, and total discounted benefits for the $800 billion investment climbed to more than $2.1 trillion.&#160;
Ensuring that research and development is part of the world’s climate change response portfolio would make mitigation efforts more efficient and significantly enhance their ability to reduce carbon emissions over the next century.
But these favorable net benefits reflect very conservative assumptions regarding the timing of emissions reductions and when the developing world would “come onboard.”
Optimizing investment in the portfolio over time would, for example, increase the discounted benefits by more than a factor of three.
Expected benefits would increase further if we included the chance that potentially higher climate sensitivities would exacerbate damages, even though doing so would require including similarly plausible lower climate sensitivities, which would push in the opposite direction.
Fighting climate change can be a sound investment, even though neither mitigation nor adaptation alone will be enough to “solve” the problem.
To make a real difference, especially in the near term, the world must combine mitigation and adaptation with increased research and development into carbon-saving and sequestering technology, which in turn requires designing and exploiting market-based incentives.
A “Reset” Button for Europe’s Backyard
STOCKHOLM – One year after the war in Georgia of last August, pushing the “reset” button on diplomatic relations is a popular endeavor nowadays.
President Barack Obama recently journeyed to Moscow in order to “reset” strained United States-Russian ties.
The European Union, though not in need of a “reset” because of strained ties with its eastern neighbors, is involved in a deep strategic reconstruction of those relations.
When the EU launched its new “Eastern Partnership” in May, the purpose was to promote further integration with the Union’s six immediate eastern neighbors – Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine.
The global financial crisis had made an updated and strengthened policy for the EU’s eastern neighborhood an urgent need.
Equally important was the fact that all the countries concerned expressed an ambition to move closer to the EU.
The Eastern Partnership – originating from a Polish/Swedish initiative – offers to the six countries a substantial upgrading and deepening of relations with the EU in key areas.
In trade and economic relations, it clearly sets out the objective of establishing deep and comprehensive free-trade areas between the EU and the partner countries.
It confirms full visa liberalization as a long-term goal (with visa facilitation agreements in the meantime), promises enhanced cooperation on energy security, diversification, and efficiency, and comes with dedicated programs and projects to help the neighbors in their integration and reform efforts in all these areas.
Sweden’s assumption of the EU Presidency this month should help these efforts.
However, it comes at a time when the Union’s eastern neighborhood faces severe challenges, with the financial and economic crisis hitting many of the partner countries hard.
Ukraine suffers from the sharp drop in global demand and trade, severely undermining its steel industry.
Georgia’s economic success has been largely dependent on direct foreign investment, for which there is hardly any appetite today.
Partner countries that are less integrated into the global market, such as Moldova, have seen the crisis arrive more slowly, but the real effect might be equally as bad, and they are likely to recover more slowly.
The Eastern Partnership does not offer any quick remedies to the crisis.
But it can provide a political framework and institution-building support to improve the deficiencies that made these countries so vulnerable to the crisis: imperfect market economies, weak state institutions, and continued corruption.
The Eastern Partnership’s offer of deep integration with the EU in the areas such as trade and energy carries with it considerable transformational power.
The other type of crisis that most of the partner countries are enduring is political.
In most of these countries, democratic development has not yet reached a point where a change in government is a routine part of political life and can take place without risking the country’s stability.
The Eastern Partnership is based on the profound values of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
Political association with the EU, and the process of integration under this Partnership, will promote reforms in these key areas.
The Swedish EU Presidency will concentrate on starting up the concrete work – the nuts and bolts – of the Partnership.
The establishment of “Comprehensive Institution-Building Programs,” designed to support reform of key institutions in each partner country, should take place before the year’s end.
Some flagship initiatives proposed by the European Commission will finally see the light of day as well, and new projects and initiatives are likely to be developed.
Here, Sweden will attach particular importance to energy efficiency programs, which will serve not only the purposes of enhancing energy security and reducing costs, but will also be an important contribution to the fight against climate change.
The Swedish Presidency, together with the European Commission, intends to organize the first meeting of the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum this autumn.
We hope to see the start of parliamentary cooperation, as well as exchanges between local and regional authorities of the thirty-three EU and partner countries.
At the end of the year, a meeting of EU foreign ministers and their colleagues from the six partners will assess the progress made so far and give guidance on the way ahead.
The Eastern Partnership is about EU integration, about the six countries moving closer to the EU’s values, legislation, and ways of working, and about the EU being there to support and help this convergence.
In Russia, there is a perception that is sometimes fostered which suggests that the Partnership is directed against it.
But this, of course, is untrue.
On the contrary, Russia, like Turkey, will be welcome to take part in relevant activities within the Partnership’s multilateral dimensions.
The Eastern Partnership is not an answer to all the problems and difficulties that the six partners are facing.
Nevertheless, it does represent a clear commitment by the EU to lend its political and economic support to their transition and reform – a process that should bring prosperity and stability to the whole region.
A “Third Way” for Confronting Russia
PARIS – “Let’s engage Russia if we can, but contain it if we must.”
These two alternatives already defined Western strategy toward Russia in the mid-1990’s.