$10,000 Gold?
SAN FRANCISCO – It has never been easy to have a rational conversation about the value of gold.
Lately, with gold prices up more than 300% over the last decade, it is harder than ever. Just last December, fellow economists Martin Feldstein and Nouriel Roubini each penned op-eds bravely questioning bullish market sentiment, sensibly pointing out gold’s risks.
Wouldn’t you know it?
Since their articles appeared, the price of gold has moved up still further.
Gold prices even hit a record-high $1,300 recently.
Last December, many gold bugs were arguing that the price was inevitably headed for $2,000.
Now, emboldened by continuing appreciation, some are suggesting that gold could be headed even higher than that.
One successful gold investor recently explained to me that stock prices languished for a more than a decade before the Dow Jones index crossed the 1,000 mark in the early 1980’s.
Since then, the index has climbed above 10,000.
Now that gold has crossed the magic $1,000 barrier, why can’t it increase ten-fold, too?
Admittedly, getting to a much higher price for gold is not quite the leap of imagination that it seems.
After adjusting for inflation, today’s price is nowhere near the all-time high of January 1980.
Back then, gold hit $850, or well over $2,000 in today’s dollars.
But January 1980 was arguably a “freak peak” during a period of heightened geo-political instability.
At $1,300, today’s price is probably more than double very long-term, inflation-adjusted, average gold prices.
So what could justify another huge increase in gold prices from here?
One answer, of course, is a complete collapse of the US dollar.
With soaring deficits, and a rudderless fiscal policy, one does wonder whether a populist administration might recklessly turn to the printing press.
And if you are really worried about that, gold might indeed be the most reliable hedge.
Sure, some might argue that inflation-indexed bonds offer a better and more direct inflation hedge than gold. But gold bugs are right to worry about whether the government will honor its commitments under more extreme circumstances.
In fact, as Carmen Reinhart and I discuss in our recent book on the history of financial crises, This Time is Different, cash-strapped governments will often forcibly convert indexed debt to non-indexed debt, precisely so that its value might be inflated away.
Even the United States abrogated indexation clauses in bond contracts during the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
So it can happen anywhere.
Even so, the fact that very high inflation is possible does not make it probable, so one should be cautious in arguing that higher gold prices are being driven by inflation expectations.
Some have argued instead that gold’s long upward march has been partly driven by the development of new financial instruments that make it easier to trade and speculate in gold.
There is probably some slight truth – and also a certain degree of irony – to this argument.
After all, medieval alchemists engaged in what we now consider an absurd search for ways to transform base metals into gold.
Wouldn’t it be paradoxical, then, if financial alchemy could make an ingot of gold worth dramatically more?
In my view, the most powerful argument to justify today’s high price of gold is the dramatic emergence of Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East into the global economy.
As legions of new consumers gain purchasing power, demand inevitably rises, driving up the price of scarce commodities.
At the same time, emerging-market central banks need to accumulate gold reserves, which they still hold in far lower proportion than do rich-country central banks.
With the euro looking less appetizing as a diversification play away from the dollar, gold’s appeal has naturally grown.
So, yes, there are solid fundamentals that arguably support today’s higher gold price, although it is far more debatable whether and to what extent they will continue to support higher prices in the future.
Indeed, another critical fundamental factor that has been sustaining high gold prices might prove far more ephemeral than globalization. Gold prices are extremely sensitive to global interest-rate movements.
After all, gold pays no interest and even costs something to store.
Today, with interest rates near or at record lows in many countries, it is relatively cheap to speculate in gold instead of investing in bonds.
But if real interest rates rise significantly, as well they might someday, gold prices could plummet.
Most economic research suggests that gold prices are very difficult to predict over the short to medium term, with the odds of gains and losses being roughly in balance.
It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends.
Yes, gold has had a great run, but so, too, did worldwide housing prices until a couple of years ago.
If you are a high-net-worth investor, a sovereign wealth fund, or a central bank, it makes perfect sense to hold a modest proportion of your portfolio in gold as a hedge against extreme events.
But, despite gold’s heightened allure in the wake of an extraordinary run-up in its price, it remains a very risky bet for most of us.
Of course, such considerations might have little influence on prices.
What was true for the alchemists of yore remains true today: gold and reason are often difficult to reconcile.
Is Iraq the Next Afghanistan?
At the onset of the US-led war in Iraq, two competing views shaped predictions about the outcome.
The first contended that overthrowing Saddam Hussein's regime would usher in a democratic era in Iraq that would serve as a model and catalyst for democratic change regionally.
Derided by detractors as a new "domino theory," this view presented intervention in Iraq as similar to America's role in post-WWII Japan.
Against the optimism of that "Japan scenario," pessimists argued that a "Somalia scenario" was more likely.
They staked their claim on the tribal, sectarian, and multiethnic nature of Iraq, which, in the absence of dictatorship, would supposedly incite Iraq's collapse into a "failed state," with rampant warlordism, ethnic and religious feuds, and harboring of terrorist organizations.
But the main question now is whether Iraq will drift along lines somewhere between these two scenarios, increasingly resembling Afghanistan.
This "Afghan scenario" implies a weak state with nominal power over effectively autonomous fiefdoms that are headed by strongmen who are represented in the central government.
Bad as it sounds, this prospect appears to be a "realistic" compromise between the supposedly utopian vision of a flourishing, unified democracy and the wretchedness of a failed state.
Many of the actions and policies of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), as well as higher-level Bush administration decisions, seem to point to a resigned acceptance that early hopes that Iraq would embrace Western-style democracy were misplaced.
Indeed, such hopes were misplaced.
Iraq's political culture - and that of most of the Middle East - is incompatible with the basic components of a recognizable Western-style democracy: notions of individual rights and responsibilities are lacking, the concept of a patriarchal state is deeply rooted, and individual cultural identity is rarely tied to the national community.
On the other hand, much circular logic figures in analyses that consider the "traditional" nature of Iraqi society an obstacle to liberal democracy.
For these analyses are hardly neutral, but unwittingly enter an ongoing confrontation.
In Iraq, as elsewhere in the Arab and Muslim worlds, a cultural war is being waged between two paradigms: grand narratives that accept and promote a collectivistic understanding (nationalism, socialism, Islamism), versus an implicit paradigm of individualistic modernity that is locally rooted yet informed by the global experience.
The frontlines of this war are notions of the individual, cultural identity, civil society, and the nation-state.
The religious Islamic component in Iraqi social life should not be underestimated.
But it also should not be equated with the political Islamism that strives to capitalize on it.
Nationalist and leftist political discourses did leave an imprint on the Iraqi value system, but they are not its sole components.
Indeed, the nominal acceptance of grand narratives of "democracy" and "human rights" as common bases for political discourse represents a crucial shift in demarcating the cultural battle.
This cultural debate is not limited to the Arab scene.
There are also vigorous discussions in the West about the applicability of democratic institutions to the Arab context.
Advocates of the notion of "Arab exceptionalism," which questions the ability of Arab societies to adapt democratic systems are in fact objectively allied with "grand narrative" ideologues - and also with the beneficiaries of the Arab world's patronage-based political order.
The models used in the West, both in political circles and in academia, for the analysis and interpretation of Arab societies are seriously deficient.
In particular, many analyses nowadays promote an ethnic model, reducing Iraq to an artificial construct that rests atop a fragmented "reality" of separate communities.
Some have even suggested hastening the outcome predicted by this faulty view by dividing Iraq into its "genuine" original components: Sunni, Shi`i, and Kurd.
In fact, Iraqi society is more complex than this.
The reception and adoption of democracy is not a function of sectarian belonging, but a reflection of the multi-dimensional historical, cultural, religious, and political identities of Iraqi individuals.
Given the right circumstances, it is eminently possible to mobilize Iraqi society towards a democratic formulation of its state-to-be.
The fall of Saddam ushers in the right circumstances.
Indeed, the seeming failure of a recognizable democratic core to emerge in Iraq within the first few months of the collapse of Saddam's dictatorship is due more to idiosyncrasies of the process than to any presumed essential nature of Iraqi society.
Upon Saddam's fall, a large "middle ground" existed in Iraq that was positively disposed towards democratic discourse and practice.
Policy mistakes and reversals eroded this middle ground, opening a path for ideological Islamism and a reconstituted neo-Ba`athism.
The key mistake was the failure of occupation forces to equip and empower the small group of Iraqi liberal democratic figures to tap into this middle ground.
As a result, the space for a liberal democratic outcome receded.
But to treat this setback as a failure would be a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Iraqi democrats must re-assess and develop a clear public strategy.
The CPA, and the world community, must not prejudice the outcome of their efforts by accepting a facile and bogus view of Iraqi society.
Even if such efforts succeed, the road to a full-fledged democratic system in Iraq will still be arduous and expensive.
But instead of succumbing to a "Somalia scenario," dreaming of a "Japan scenario," or settling for an "Afghanistan scenario," Iraq may yet become a "scenario" for successful intervention in the 21 st century.
“Neo-Ottoman” Turkey?
ANKARA – Nowadays, the international media are obsessed with the question of who “lost” Turkey and what that supposed loss means for Europe and the West.
More alarmingly, some commentators liken Turkey’s neighborhood policy to a revival of Ottoman imperialism.
Recently, a senior Turkish columnist went so far as to quote Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu as saying that “we are indeed neo-Ottoman.”
As someone who was present when Davutoğlu made his presentation to the parliamentary faction of Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), I can attest to the fact that he did not use such terminology.
In fact, Davutoğlu and all of us in the AKP foreign-policy community never use this term, because it is simply a mispresentation of our position.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is devised to reintegrate Turkey into its immediate neighborhoods, including the Balkans, the Black Sea, the Caucasus, the Middle East, and the Eastern Mediterranean. We aim to deepen our political dialogue, increase our trade, and multiply our people-to-people contacts with our neighbors in the form of sports, tourism, and cultural actvities.
When Egon Bahr formulated his Ostpolitik in the 1960’s, no one asked Will Brandt whether Germany was lost.
God bestowed upon Turkey a geographical position that fundamentally requires for us to engage with East and West, North and South.
This is neither a choice nor a luxury – it is a necessity.
The symbol of the Byzantine and the Selçuk Empires, which occupied roughly the same geography that Turkey does today, was a double-headed eagle looking both east and west.
It should be no wonder that Turkey is also seeking to engage both ends of its territories and feels that its security is best consolidated by minimizing risks together with its neighbors.
So we find the current debate on Turkey’s orientation rather superflous, and in some cases ill-intentioned.
Our neighborhood policy needs support, not criticism.
Turkey has become an invaluable asset in the make-up of our surrounding regions, and is already changing the status quo in favor of more stability and predictability.
Our efforts at normalization with Armenia, for example, are destined to bring change to the entire South Caucasus.
We are doing our part in terms of burden-sharing.
Sensible Europeans understand that.
To be sure, some of our neighbors are difficult.
But no country has the luxury of choosing its neighbors.
Turkey’s neighborhood policy is very realistic, based on genuine interests, not some romantic neo-Ottoman nostagia, as more than a few international commentators have suggested.
True, there is a neo-Ottoman revival in the cultural field, and our citizens are eager to rediscover Ottoman life, culture, and practices.
As Turkey is normalizing domestically, it is also reinterpreting its national historical narrative.
This is a natural byproduct of consolidating our democracy. However, trying to paint our carefully constructed foreign-policy initiatives with imperialist overtones is not only a stark mispresentation, but also does gross injustice to our well-intentioned efforts to stabilize our region.
In Roman mythology, Janus was the god of gates, doorways, beginnings, and endings.
Turkey today is a Janus-like geography that offers gates and doorways to the East and West.
It offers beginnings and endings to the Caucasus, the Black Sea, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean.
In this capacity, Turkey complements and contributes to a unique transitional passage between otherwise difficult regions, for it signifies centuries-old co-existence and adjustment.
Turkish foreign policy contributes to that coming together and helps its immeditate neighborhoods to connect with one another.
Contrary to recent charges, Turkey’s foreign policymakers are not seeking to revive the Ottoman Empire.
Instead, we seek Turkey’s historic reintegration into its immediate neighborhoods, thereby correcting an anomaly of the Cold War years.
Such re-integration would only benefit the European Union and our other Western, NATO allies. None of them, therefore, has any reason to express discomfort with Turkey.
\
Why Wait for the Euro?
Although the EU's eastward enlargement has not yet happened, the debate is already shifting to ask what will follow: when should the new, predominantly postcommunist, members adopt the euro? Assuming that they comply with the Maastricht Treaty's provisions concerning the EMU - and are not unfairly held to more stringent criteria - the core issue is whether new members would benefit more by waiting or whether they should seek early entry. 

At the outset, it must be stressed that, in seeking earlier entry into the EMU a country assumes a more ambitious fiscal and structural program than would be needed if EMU membership is delayed.
Early entry, otherwise, would be an empty gesture. 
I believe that early adoption of the euro is not only possible, but preferable to delay.
By early adoption I mean the shortest permissible period of time - two years - following a new member subordinating its monetary policy to the fiscal and monetary constraints of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II).
Assuming entry into both the EU and ERM II in 2004, new members should aim to enter the eurozone around 2006. 
Is this realistic?
Well, most candidate countries have already achieved a high degree of structural convergence with the EU.
Exports to the Union have soared since 1991, when the collapse of the Soviet-era COMECON trading system forced a radical reorientation of trade - helped by massive foreign investment from the EU - towards Western markets. Most accession candidates now send more exports to the EU than Greece, Portugal, and Spain did when they entered the EU and EMU. 
Progress on disinflation is similarly impressive.
Annual inflation in most candidate countries has fallen to 4-5% - not much higher than in many EU countries, and lower than in The Netherlands last year.
As with structural convergence, EU candidates already outperform Spain, Portugal, and Greece at a comparable time before their EMU debut. Nor is there much risk of large, future corrective price swings because all but a few prices are completely liberalized. 
Theoretical studies suggest that inflation in the accession countries will remain stubbornly higher than the Maastricht Treaty allows.
The culprit in this pessimistic view is the so-called "Balassa-Samuelson" effect: rapid productivity growth in the accession candidates' tradable sectors - export manufacturing, for example - is pushing up real wages throughout their economies, including in non-tradable sectors like services. This overall rise in real wages in the face of lower productivity growth for the service sector boosts relative prices and keeps inflation above the eurozone average. 
The Balassa-Samuelson effect is still evident in Greece, Spain and Portugal. But as empirical research prepared by the CEC5 National Banks estimates, its contribution to total price growth in the candidate countries is 1-2%.
With the Balassa-Samuelson effect so subdued and limited scope for future corrective inflation, the EMU criterion regarding price stability - of annual inflation within 1.5% of the average rate for the three best-performing economies in the EU - is within reach. 
But is early admission to EMU preferable to postponing membership?
From the standpoint of current member states, would admitting Hungary, Latvia, Poland, or Slovakia, sooner rather than later, drag down the euro as many fear? 
Fears that extending EMU to new states "too soon" would undermine the euro's external exchange rate are irrational. If all candidate countries join the EU at around the same time, they will together account for a mere 6% of its total GDP.
So any negative impact on the euro from rapid accession to EMU would at worst amount to little more than a rounding error. 
Delaying entry into EMU could make sense if a longer wait produced more information. But a wait of greater length might produce nothing but added noise.
Equally, the transition period is already turbulent, with convergence-driven capital flows driving up exchange rates and complicating monetary policy in several candidate countries, including Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary.
Indeed, capital-flow volatility could make short work of the flexible exchange rate on offer under ERM II - a 15% fluctuation band either side of a central parity. 
Some argue that ERM II membership should be viewed as a longer-term proposition - possibly lasting until 2010 - for the benefit of candidates themselves. The benefit is simple: ERM II permits some exchange rate flexibility, as opposed to the fixed rates implied by adopting the euro.
This would help keep the candidates' economic output high and thus sustain real convergence with average EU income levels. 
This is an exceptionally weak argument, and a politically suspect one, too.
As European Central Bank data shows, average per capita GDP in the accession candidates is 44% of the eurozone level. The size of the income gap combines with the small growth differentials to imply that the process of real convergence will extend far beyond even the most cautious dates for EU and EMU entry, probably lasting several decades.
More important, long-lasting economic growth does not depend on the type of exchange rate - whether flexible or fixed (EMU) - while early accession will speed up crucial reforms. 
A few years of limited exchange rate flexibility is a poor substitute for rapid completion of structural reforms.
In almost all candidates, further disinflation and long-term economic growth require fiscal consolidation, more flexible labor markets, and completion of privatization.
Delaying EMU entry risks weakening the incentive to complete these politically costly but necessary reforms. 
Any delay in completing reforms will ultimately slow the process of real convergence that EU officials rightly hold dear. Early adoption, by contrast, would be more conducive to these reforms, and thus to real convergence.
Success here would allow candidate countries to start reaping the benefits of greater price transparency, reduced transaction costs, and a solid macroeconomic framework.
This strategy, not one of deferred entry, promises the most for both the EU's current and its future members. 
1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades. The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity.
By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
The End of 1945
NEW YORK – On May 8, 1945, when World War II in Europe officially ended, much of the world lay in ruins.
But if the human capacity for destruction knows few limits, the ability to start over again is just as remarkable.
Perhaps that is why mankind has so far managed to survive.
No doubt, millions of people at the end of the war were too hungry and exhausted to do anything much beyond staying alive.
But, at the same time, a wave of idealism swept across the wreckage, a collective sense of determination to build a more equal, peaceful, and safer world.
That is why the war’s great hero, Winston Churchill, was voted out of office in the summer of 1945, even before Japan surrendered.
Men and women had not risked their lives simply to return to the old days of class privilege and social deprivation.
They wanted better housing, education, and free health care for all.
Similar demands were heard all over Europe, where the anti-Nazi or anti-fascist resistance was often led by leftists, or indeed Communists, and prewar conservatives were frequently tainted by collaboration with fascist regimes.
There was talk of revolution in countries such as France, Italy, and Greece.
This did not happen, because neither the Western Allies nor the Soviet Union supported it.
Stalin was content to settle for an empire in Eastern Europe.
But even Charles de Gaulle, a resistance leader of the right, had to accept Communists in his first postwar government, and he agreed to nationalize industries and banks.
The swing to the left, to social-democratic welfare states, occurred all over Western Europe.
It was part of the 1945 consensus.
A different kind of revolution was taking place in Europe’s former colonies in Asia, where native peoples had no desire to be ruled once more by Western powers, which had been so ignominiously defeated by Japan.
Vietnamese, Indonesians, Filipinos, Burmese, Indians, and Malays wanted their freedom, too.
These aspirations were often voiced in the United Nations, founded in 1945.
The UN, like the dream of European unity, was also part of the 1945 consensus.
For a short while, many prominent people – Albert Einstein, for one – believed that only a world government would be able to ensure global peace.
This dream quickly faded when the Cold War divided the world into two hostile blocs.
But in some ways the 1945 consensus, in the West, was strengthened by Cold War politics.
Communism, still wrapped in the laurel leaf of anti-fascism, had a wide intellectual and emotional appeal, not only in the so-called Third World, but also in Western Europe.
Social democracy, with its promise of greater equality and opportunities for all, served as an ideological antidote.
Most social democrats were in fact fiercely anti-communist.
Today, 70 years later, much of the 1945 consensus no longer survives.
Few people can muster great enthusiasm for the UN.
The European dream is in crisis.
And the post-war social-democratic welfare state is being eroded more and more every day.
The rot began during the 1980s, under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
Neoliberals attacked the expense of entitlement programs and the vested interests of trade unions.
Citizens, it was thought, had to become more self-reliant; government welfare programs were making everyone soft and dependent.
In Thatcher’s famous words, there was no such thing as “society,” only families and individuals who ought to be taking care of themselves.
But the 1945 consensus was dealt a much greater blow precisely when we all rejoiced at the collapse of the Soviet Empire, the other great twentieth-century tyranny.
In 1989, it looked as if the dark legacy of World War II, the enslavement of Eastern Europe, was finally over.
And in many ways, it was.
But much else collapsed with the Soviet model.
Social democracy lost its raison d’être as an antidote to Communism.
All forms of leftist ideology – indeed, everything that smacked of collective idealism – came to be viewed as misguided utopianism that could lead only to the Gulag.
Neoliberalism filled the vacuum, creating vast wealth for some people, but at the expense of the ideal of equality that had emerged from World War II.
The extraordinary reception of Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century shows how keenly the consequences of the collapse of the left have been felt.
In recent years, other ideologies have also emerged to fill the human need for collective ideals.
The rise of right-wing populism reflects revived yearnings for pure national communities that keep immigrants and minorities out.
And, perversely, American neo-conservatives have transformed the internationalism of the old left by seeking to impose a democratic world order by US military force.
The answer to these alarming developments is not nostalgia.
We cannot simply return to the past.
Too much has changed.
But a new aspiration toward social and economic equality, and international solidarity, is badly needed.
It cannot be the same as the 1945 consensus, but we would do well, on this anniversary, to remember why that consensus was forged in the first place.
2011: My Space Odyssey
MOSCOW – Most people who know of me think of me as an information-technology expert, someone who probably lives in California and invests in edgy Internet start-ups.
In fact, my formal residence is in New York City, but I am about to spend most of the next five months in Russia, training to be a cosmonaut in Star City, just outside Moscow. 
It all came about in a number of ways.
First of all, as a kid, I just assumed that I would go to the moon, without having to do much in particular to make it happen.
I just took it for granted that, by the time I was, say, 40, space travel would be a common thing.
My father was involved with the United States space program, and we had some moon rocks at home, so I thought it was no big deal.
Then I got distracted for about 40 years.
A few years ago, however, I started paying attention to space again.
A lot of people I knew in the IT industry were doing the same: Elon Musk, a co-founder of PayPal, founded Space-X; Jeff Bezos of Amazon started a spacecraft company called Blue Origin; Jeff Greason, a senior manager at Intel, started XCOR Aerospace (in which I’m an investor). In 2005, the last year I held my PC Forum conference for IT entrepreneurs, I started a conference called Flight School for entrepreneurs in space and private aviation.
Meanwhile, in about 2005, I was in South Africa with a small group advising former President Thabo Mbeki and his government about its IT policy.
One of the group was Mark Shuttleworth, founder of Thawte (sold to VeriSign), who had recently come back from a trip to the space station as the second “space tourist.”
One evening, the group sat around a campfire as the sun set, and around 50 African schoolchildren were bussed in.
Altogether, there were about 100 of us, President Mbeki included, around a roaring fire.
Once it was dark, a screen was set up and Mark showed home videos from space.
He gave a fascinating talk about his adventures, complete with clips of him floating around, catching bubbles in his mouth, and so on.
The kids loved it, and I'm sure some of them decided then and there to study math and science.
Eventually, I invested in Space Adventures, the company that organized Shuttleworth’s trip into space.
Later, I went on a tour that they organized to watch the launch of Charles Simonyi, the fifth (and soon seventh) space tourist, from Baikonur in Kazakhstan.
(Simonyi wrote the Microsoft Word program, and now has another start-up, Intentional Software, and a foundation, as well as a Web site, CharlesinSpace.org.)
Soon after, I started casually discussing the notion of becoming a backup cosmonaut with the Space Adventures team.
Yes, I would love to actually go, but the trip to space costs $35 to $40 million, whereas backup training costs “only” $3 million.
So I had vague thoughts that I might go into space sometime in 2011 - the year that Google co-founder Sergey Brin is (very) tentatively slated to go.
Space Adventures was pushing for 2009, but I was pretty busy.
Then something happened last spring: my sister Emily discovered that she had cancer and had a double mastectomy.
(She is doing well now and, in fact, just won a mini-marathon.)
A couple of weeks later, I was faced with one of those conflicts: a board meeting here, a conference there, another opportunity at the same time somewhere else.
“Aaagh,” I thought, “if only I had a double mastectomy: I could cancel all these things and no one would complain!”

Good grief!  I realized my priorities were all out of whack.   So in some odd way, this sabbatical in Russia is my alternative to a double mastectomy – a positive one, to be sure, but the same kind of reset-button experience. 

It is also the answer to another question I hear a lot because of my work on human genetics through 23andMe (www.23andme.com) and the Personal Genome Project (www.personalgenome.org): If you learned you had a high chance of developing Alzheimer’s in a few years, what would you do?
Why, I’d go train to be a cosmonaut, of course! And why wait to find out I may get Alzheimer’s?  Next month, I will write about what training to go into space actually involves.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers. And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
Трамптық белгісіздік
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – Әрбір қаңтар айында, мен алдағы жылға арналған болжамды дайындай бастаймын.
Экономикалық болжау дайындау оңай іс емес; алайда, Гарри Трумэннің бір қолды экономисттердің болуына («екінші жағынан» деп айта алмайтын) өтінішінде шындықтың барына қарамастан, менің болжамдарым дұрыс болды деп айта аламын.
Соңғы жылдары, мен күшті фискалдық ынталандыру болмаған жағдайда, (Еуропада немесе Америка Құрама Штаттарында жақын арада болжанбаған) 2008 жылдың Ұлы құлдырауынан сауығу баяу болады деп дұрыс таптым.
Осы болжамдарды жасаған кезде мен кешенді эконометрикалық модельдерге қарағанда базалық экономикалық күштерді талдауға толығырақ сүйенген болатынмын.
Мысалы, 2016 жылдың басында, соңғы бірнеше жыл бойы орын алған жаһандық жиынтық сұраныстың тапшылығының күрт өзгеруі екіталай екені анық көрінді.
Сондықтан, мен әсерлі қалыпқа келуді болжағандар туралы олар әлемді тым жақсы жағынан көріп, кемшіліктерді ескермей жатыр деп ойладым.
Мен күткендей, көптеген экономикалық даму жағдайлары орын алды.
Бірақ, 2016 жылдың саяси оқиғалары олай жайлы болмады.
Мен, өсіп келе жатқан теңсіздік мәселесі, әсіресе АҚШ-та, сондай-ақ бүкіл әлем бойынша көптеген елдерде, шешілмесе, онда оның саяси салдары болатыны туралы көптеген жылдар бойы жазып келдім.
Бірақ теңсіздікке байланысты жағдай нашарлай бастады, тіпті АҚШ-та орташа өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда деген шошынышты деректер де белгілі болды.
Энн Кейс  және Ангус Дитонның өткен жылғы зерттеуінде айтылғандай, тұрғын халықтың үлкен сегменттерінде өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда, онын ішінде Американың Тот белдеуінің ашулы ерлері де бар.
Бірақ, табысы төмендердің 90%-ы ғасырдың үштен бірі бойы тоқырауда болған (және елеулі бөлігі төмендеп жатқан) жағдайда, денсаулық сақтау деректеріне жүгінсек, еліміздің өте үлкен бөлігінің жағдайы нашар.
Америка бұл үрдістің басында болғанымен, басқа жерлерде жағдай бұдан аса жақсы емес.
Саяси салдардың болуы анық көрінгенімен, олардың нысаны мен мерзімдері әлдеқайда айқын болмады.
Бұрын емес, ал дәл экономика түзетіліп келе жатқанда, АҚШ-та неге саяси қарсылық пайда болды?
Және неге ол оңға қарай бет алды?
Негізі, өздері қатты жақтаған  жаһандану нәтижесінде жұмыс орындарын жоғалтқан адамдарға ұсынылатын көмекті бұғаттаған республикашылдар болды.
26 штатта, медициналық көмекті кеңейтуге республиканшылдар қарсы болып, осылайша жағдайлары төмен адамдарға медициналық сақтандыру берілмеді.
Және басқаларды пайдалана отырып өмір сүрген, ашық түрде салықты төлемегенін мойындап және салықтан жалтаруды мақтаныш қылған біреу қалайша жеңіске жетті?
Дональд Трамп заман үрдісін дәл тапты: жағдай жақсы болмады, және көптеген сайлаушылар өзгерісті қалады.
Енді олардың тілегі орындалады- ешқандай іс әдеттегідей болмайды.
Бірақ мұндай белгісіздік әлі болмаған.
Трамп қандай саясат жүргізетіні, олардың қайсысы табысқа жетеді немесе  олардың салдары қандай болады - мұның бәрі белгісіз болып тұр.
Трамп қалай болса да сауда соғысын жасайтындай.
Бірақ Қытай мен Мексика қандай жауап қайтарады?
Трамп өзінің ұсыныстары Дүниежүзілік сауда ұйымы ережесін бұзатынын түсінуі-ақ мүмкін, бірақ ол сондай-ақ, ДСҰ оған қарсы шығуы үшін ұзақ уақыт қажет екенін білетін шығар.
Ал ол уақытқа дейін, Американың сауда шоты қайта балансқа келуі мүмкін.
Бірақ бұл ойынды екі жақ та ойнай алады: Қытай, ұқсас әрекеттерді жасай алады, бірақ оның жауабы шеберлеу болуы мүмкін.
Бірақ сауда соғысы орын алса, қандай болар еді?
Трамптың жеңе аламын деп ойлауында негіз болуы мүмкін; өйткені, Қытай АҚШ-қа экспорт бойынша тәуелдірек болып табылады, бұл әрине АҚШ-қа артықшылық береді.
Бірақ сауда соғысы бір жақ қана жеңіп алатын ойын емес.
АҚШ та сондай-ақ жеңіледі.
Қытай өткір саяси ауырсынуды тудыра отырып, кегін ала алады.
Қытайдың АҚШ-қа қарағанда, АҚШ-тың өздеріне зиян келтіруіне қарсы тұруында да артықшылығы бар.
Ауырсынуды кімнің оңайырақ шыдай алатынын бәріміз білеміз ғой.
Ол, қарапайым халқы қазірдің өзінде ұзақ зардап шеккен АҚШ па, немесе қиын-қыстау заманға қарамастан, 6% -дан асатын өсуді қалыптастыра білген Қытай ма?
Кеңінен алғанда, республикашылдар / Трамп күн тәртібі, стандартты GOP рецептінде көрсетілгендегіге қарағанда, салық қысқартуларымен бірге байларға қарай көбірек бағытталып, байлықтың төмен сарқылу идеясына негізделген, ол, шын мәнінде тиімді болмаған Рейган дәуірінің ұсыным экономикасының жалғасындай көрінеді.  Алау атқан риторика, немесе Twitter-де таңғы үште жазылған сандырақ ойлар, кем дегенде біраз уақытқа, Рейган революциясының салдарынан артты қалып кеткендердің ашуын басуы мүмкін.
Бірақ  бұл қаншалықты ұзақ уақытқа жетеді?
Ал содан соң не болады?
Трамп вуду экономикасының өз нұсқасын жүргізіп, экономиканың негізгі заңдарының күшін жоюды қалауы мүмкін.
Бірақ олай жасау мүмкін емес.
Әлемнің ең ірі экономикасы 2017 жылы және одан әрі белгісіз саяси теңізге жол тартқанда, жәй бір пенде үшін болжам жасау ойсыз, аңғал қылықтай болар, тек айқын жәйттарды атау болмаса: су ағыны құбылмалы болады, және көптеген саясаттанушы кемелер батып та кетер.
9/11 and the New Authoritarianism
Five years after the attacks on the Twin Towers in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, “9/11” is no longer a mere date.
It has entered the history books as the beginning of something new, a new era perhaps, but in any case a time of change.
The terrorist bombings in Madrid and London and elsewhere will also be remembered; but it is “9/11” that has become the catchphrase, almost like “August 1914.”
But was it really a war that started on September 11, 2001?
Not all are happy about this American notion.
During the heyday of Irish terrorism in the UK, successive British governments went out of their way not to concede to the IRA the notion that a war was being waged.
“War” would have meant acceptance of the terrorists as legitimate enemies, in a sense as equals in a bloody contest for which there are accepted rules of engagement.
This is neither a correct description nor a useful terminology for terrorist acts, which are more correctly described as criminal.
By calling them war – and naming an opponent, usually al-Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden – the United States government has justified domestic changes that, before the 9/11 attacks, would have been unacceptable in any free country.
Most of these changes were embodied in the so-called “USA Patriot Act.”
Though some of the changes simply involved administrative regulations, the Patriot Act’s overall effect was to erode the great pillars of liberty, such as habeas corpus , the right to recourse to an independent court whenever the state deprives an individual of his freedom.
From an early date, the prison camp at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba became the symbol of something unheard of: the arrest without trial of “illegal combatants” who are deprived of all human rights.
The world now wonders how many more of these non-human humans are there in how many places.
For everyone else, a kind of state of emergency was proclaimed that has allowed state interference in essential civil rights.
Controls at borders have become an ordeal for many, and police persecution now burdens quite a few.
A climate of fear has made life hard for anyone who looks suspicious or acts suspiciously, notably for Muslims.
Such restrictions on freedom did not meet with much public opposition when they were adopted.
On the contrary, by and large it was the critics, not the supporters, of these measures who found themselves in trouble.
In Britain, where Prime Minister Tony Blair supported the US attitude entirely, the government introduced similar measures and even offered a new theory.
Blair was the first to argue that security is the first freedom.
In other words, liberty is not the right of individuals to define their own lives, but the right of the state to restrict individual freedom in the name of a security that only the state can define.
This is the beginning of a new authoritarianism.
The problem exists in all countries affected by the threat of terrorism, though in many it has not become quite as specific.
In most countries of continental Europe, “9/11” has remained an American date.
There is even a debate – and indeed some evidence – concerning the question of whether involvement in the “war against terrorism” has actually increased the threat of terrorist acts.
Germans certainly use this argument to stay out of the action wherever possible.
This stance, however, has not prevented the spread of something for which a German word is used in other languages, too: Angst . A diffuse anxiety is gaining ground.
People feel uneasy and worried, especially when traveling.
Any train accident or airplane crash is now at first suspected of being an act of terrorism.
Thus, 9/11 has meant, directly or indirectly, a great shock, both psychologically and to our political systems.
While terrorism is fought in the name of democracy, the fight has in fact led to a distinct weakening of democracy, owing to official legislation and popular angst.
One of the worrying features of the 9/11 attacks is that it is hard to see their purpose beyond the perpetrators’ resentment of the West and its ways.
But the West’s key features, democracy and the rule of law, have taken a far more severe battering at the hands of their defenders than by their attackers.
Two steps, above all, are needed to restore confidence in liberty within the democracies affected by the legacy of 9/11.
First, we must make certain that the relevant legislation to meet the challenge of terrorism is strictly temporary.
Some of today’s restrictions on habeas corpus and civil liberties have sunset clauses restricting their validity; all such rules should be re-examined by parliaments regularly.
Second, and more importantly, our leaders must seek to calm, rather than exploit, public anxiety.
The terrorists with whom we are currently at “war” cannot win, because their dark vision will never gain broad popular legitimacy.
That is all the more reason for democrats to stand tall in defending our values – first and foremost by acting in accordance with them.
9/11 in Perspective
NEW YORK – It was a decade ago that 19 terrorists took control of four planes, flew two into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon with a third, and crashed the fourth in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers resisted and made it impossible for the terrorists to complete their malevolent mission.
In a matter of hours, more than 3,000 innocent people, mostly Americans, but also people from 115 other countries, had their lives suddenly and violently taken from them.
September 11, 2001, was a terrible tragedy by any measure, but it was not a historical turning point.
It did not herald a new era of international relations in which terrorists with a global agenda prevailed, or in which such spectacular terrorist attacks became commonplace.
On the contrary, 9/11 has not been replicated.
Despite the attention devoted to the “Global War on Terrorism,” the most important developments of the last ten years have been the introduction and spread of innovative information technologies, globalization, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the political upheavals in the Middle East. 
As for the future, it is much more likely to be defined by the United States’ need to put its economic house in order; China’s trajectory within and beyond its borders; and the ability of the world’s governments to cooperate on restoring economic growth, stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, and meeting energy and environmental challenges.
It is and would be wrong to make opposition to terrorism the centerpiece of what responsible governments do in the world.
Terrorists continue to be outliers with limited appeal at best.
They can destroy but not create.
It is worth noting that the people who went into the streets of Cairo and Damascus calling for change were not shouting the slogans of Al Qaeda or supporting its agenda.
Moreover, measures have been implemented to push back, successfully, against terrorists.
Intelligence assets have been redirected.
Borders have been made more secure and societies more resilient.
International cooperation has increased markedly, in part because governments that cannot agree on many things can agree on the need to cooperate in this area.
Military force has played a role as well.
Al Qaeda lost its base in Afghanistan when the Taliban government that had provided it sanctuary was ousted from power. Osama bin-Laden was finally found and killed by US Special Forces in the suburbs of Islamabad.
Drones – unmanned aircraft that are remotely steered – have proven to be effective in killing a significant number of terrorists, including many of the most important leaders.
Weak governments can be made stronger; governments that tolerate or support terrorism must be held accountable.
But progress is not to be confused with victory.
Terrorists and terrorism cannot be eliminated any more than we can rid the world of disease.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent men, women, and children in pursuit of political goals.
Indeed, terrorists are advancing in some areas.
Pakistan remains a sanctuary for Al Qaeda and some of the world’s other most dangerous terrorists.
A mixture of instability, government weakness, and ideology in countries such as Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Nigeria are providing fertile territory for terrorists to organize, train, and mount operations – much as they did in Afghanistan did a decade ago.
New groups constantly emerge from the ruins of old ones.
There is also a growing danger of homegrown terrorism.
We have seen it in Great Britain and the US.
The Internet, one of the great inventions of the modern Western world, has shown itself to be a weapon that can be used to incite and train those who wish to cause harm to that world.
The question raised in October 2003 by then US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is no less relevant today: “Are we capturing, killing, or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrassas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training, and deploying against us?”
All things being equal, we probably are.
But even small terrorist successes are costly in terms of lives, money, and making open societies less so.
What is to be done?
Alas, there is no single or silver bullet.
The establishment of a Palestinian state will not be enough for those terrorists who want to see the elimination of the Jewish state, any more than reaching a compromise over Kashmir will satisfy those Pakistan-based terrorists with bigger agendas vis-à-vis India.