The news in Sarkozy’s favored media outlet
It’s “serious,” the smitten president admitted. But he refused, even under direct questioning by reporters, to reveal an exact date.
“You’ll probably find out after it’s happened,” he taunted.
Rumor has it the couple has set February 8 or 9 for the wedding.   Others say that Sarkozy has already outsmarted the media by secretly marrying in the Elysee Palace, even as he was dodging wedding questions.
If that is true, then Sarkozy missed the romantic opportunity of a lifetime.
If the couple sizzled for cameras with Luxor and Petra as the backdrop, just imagine how hot things could get at the most romantic spot on Earth, the Taj Mahal. And, given the current rage for all things Bollywood in France, a lavish Indian wedding would be fitting.
Bruni’s own life path closely resembles any number of Bollywood stars who have made the transition from model to actress.
A comely brunette who sings is perfect for a Bollywood makeover.
The Indian government will be nothing if not relieved to see the first girlfriend made a wife.
As one of India’s leading daily newspapers, the
Despite the sometimes downright pornographic on-screen writhing of Bollywood starlets, India is still a deeply conservative society. Divorce is anathema.
(Sarkozy is now twice divorced.)
And, while mistresses abound among the privileged classes, they do not strut publicly by their power-mates’ sides.
Kissing and fondling in public, even by spouses, is taboo.
In this respect, India more resembles the France with which Sarkozy wants to make a clean break than the current one.
Most Indians, as it seems many French, would prefer not to shed the “hypocrisy” Sarkozy laments on the part of his predecessors (read: former French President François Mitterrand, who had a child with his mistress about whom the public knew nothing until the man’s funeral).
Sarkozy, of all people, should know that a large part of the gravitas of office derives from pomp and circumstance.
Statecraft is a realm where appearances are meant to be deceiving. When Sarkozy, who otherwise has such finely tuned media instincts, protests that he’s no different from any other man, he comes dangerously close to confusing the office and the person of the president.
Most French people could only dream of an exotic wedding in India.
Sarkozy could make that dream come true.
If he really is as head-over-heels in love with Bruni as he claims, and plans to marry her imminently, why not take advantage of his upcoming trip to India and make this a wedding to remember?
He could meet his bride seated majestically on the caparison of an elaborately decorated elephant, and she would look ravishing swathed and bejeweled in Indian finery.
The “bling-bling” president, as Sarkozy has been dubbed, can wear all the gold he wants and heap yet more diamonds on his bride. 
The cameras would roll, Indians would smile, and France would be treated to a Bollywood spectacle beyond its wildest dreams.
And if it’s too late for the wedding, there’s always the reception.
A Bomb in Every Reactor
BERLIN – Twenty-five years after the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl, the ongoing catastrophe at the Fukushima nuclear reactor in Japan has – it must be hoped – made clear once and for all that the purported blessings of the nuclear age are mere illusions: nuclear power is neither clean nor safe nor cheap.
Indeed, the opposite is true.
Nuclear power is saddled with three major unresolved risks: plant safety, nuclear waste, and, most menacing of all, the risk of military proliferation.
Moreover, the alternatives to nuclear energy – and to fossil fuels – are well known and technically much more advanced and sustainable.
Taking on nuclear risk is not a necessity; it is a deliberate political choice.
Fossil-fuel and nuclear energy belong to the technological utopias of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which were based on a belief in the innocence of the technologically feasible and on the fact that, at the time, only a minority of people worldwide, largely in the West, benefited from technological progress.
By contrast, the twenty-first century will be informed by the realization that the global ecosystem and its resources, which are indispensable for human survival, are finite, and that this implies an enduring responsibility to preserve what we have.
Meeting this imperative entails both an enormous technological challenge and an opportunity to redefine the meaning of modernity.
The energy future of nine billion people, which is what the world population will be in the middle of the century, lies neither in fossil fuels nor in nuclear energy, but in renewable energy sources and dramatic improvements in energy efficiency.
We already know this.
Why, then, do the most advanced countries, in particular, take on the risk of a mega-catastrophe by seeking to create energy from radioactive fission?
The answer, ultimately, doesn’t lie with any civilian use of nuclear energy, but first and foremost with its military applications.
The energy derived from splitting uranium and plutonium atoms was originally used for the ultimate weapon, the atomic bomb.
Being a nuclear power provides sovereign states with protection and prestige.
Even today, the Bomb divides the world into two classes: the few states have it, and the many that do not.
The old Cold War world order was based on the nuclear arms race between the two superpowers, the United States and Soviet Union.
To stop others from trying to become nuclear powers, which would have multiplied and spread the risk of nuclear confrontation, the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) was framed in the 1960’s. To this day, it governs the relationships between the nuclear powers and the rest of the world, imposing renunciation on the have-nots and nuclear-disarmament obligations on the haves.
Of course, the NPT has repeatedly been violated or circumvented by states that never subscribed to it.
To this day, therefore, the risk remains that the number of nuclear powers will increase, particularly given small and medium powers’ hope to enhance their prestige and position in regional conflicts.
Iran is the most current example of this.
The nuclearization of these not-always-stable states threatens to make the regional conflicts of the twenty-first century much more dangerous, and will also substantially increase the risk that nuclear weapons eventually end up in the hands of terrorists.
Despite the NPT, a clear separation between civilian and military use of nuclear energy hasn’t always worked, or worked completely, because the NPT’s rules permit all signatory states to develop and use – under international supervision – all of the components of the nuclear fuel cycle for civilian purposes.
From here, then, all that is required to become a nuclear power are a few small technical steps and political leaders’ decision to take them.
This political power, not the requirements of energy policy, is what makes giving up nuclear energy so difficult.
As a rule, the path to nuclear-power status always begins with so-called “civilian” nuclear programs.
The supposed “civilian” nuclear ambitions of Iran have thus, for instance, led to a large number of such “civilian” programs in neighboring states.
Honni soit qui mal y pense!
And, of course, the reactions of the nuclear powers to the disaster at Fukushima will be watched and analyzed closely by the so-called “clandestine threshold countries.”
So how will the world – first and foremost, the main nuclear powers – react to the Fukushima disaster?
Will the tide truly turn, propelling the world towards nuclear disarmament and a future free of nuclear weapons?
Or will we witness attempts to downplay the calamity and return to business as usual as soon as possible?
Fukushima has presented the world with a far-reaching, fundamental choice.
It was Japan, the high-tech country par excellence (not the latter-day Soviet Union) that proved unable to take adequate precautions to avert disaster in four reactor blocks.
What, then, will a future risk assessment look like if significantly less organized and developed countries begin – with the active assistance of the nuclear powers – to acquire civilian nuclear-energy capabilities?
Any decision to continue as before would send an unambiguous message to the clandestine threshold countries that are secretly pursuing nuclear weapons: despite lofty rhetoric and wordy documents, the nuclear powers lack the political will to change course.
Were they to abandon nuclear energy, however, their epochal change of heart would constitute a seminal contribution to global nuclear security – and thus to the fight against nuclear proliferation.
A Born-Again CAP
WAGENINGEN, NETHERLANDS – Born in 1957, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is now more than 50 years old, and the European Commission is proposing what it calls a health check for its middle-aged child.
But superficial repairs will not meet the European Union’s future needs.
The CAP must be born again.
Work on its renewal is due to start now, with the completed project ready in 2013.
But a much more profound re-think is needed.
The CAP’s original aim was to provide a secure source of food for the six original member states of the Union, which were importers of food and sought a degree of self-sufficiency.
Good, healthy, and cheap food had to be accessible for all citizens.
Improved agricultural productivity would benefit rural areas and give farmers a comparative share in the Union’s growing wealth.
Instruments to achieve those objectives were developed, and food security was achieved.
The CAP quickly came to be seen as the jewel in the crown of the European project.
As the EU has evolved and expanded, food systems have become more complex, involving production, processing, supply-chain organization, and wholesale and retail distribution, with all of these involving new issues like health and the environment.
The use of land is also receiving more serious scrutiny.
A 1991 study by the Netherlands Scientific Council for Governmental Policy, entitled
Those figures were for an EU of 15 countries, so with today’s 27 members the possibilities are even greater.
A Dutch analysis of land use has shown that by employing the best technical and ecological means on the best available land, substantial gains could be made in food production.
So it is not surprising that the number of farmers needed has fallen substantially.
Viewed from the standpoint of food security and the wealth of rural areas, there is now an urgent need to revisit the CAP’s main instruments so that a new policy formula can be introduced.
Perverse subsidies must be removed and recent new ones favoring products such as bio-fuels reconsidered.
The
A simplified CAP would encourage cleaner, more productive, and efficient agriculture.
A side benefit for the EU’s standing in the world could be that the World Trade Organization’s stalled Doha negotiations could be restarted once farmers in developing countries are assured of getting a fair deal from Europe.
Moreover, the CAP’s role as a motor of political and social integration in Europe could be restored once renewed policies are in place.
But renewal of this sort cannot be left to global market forces, as the results might not necessarily benefit European agriculture and society.
If the market “misbehaves,” farmers could be reduced to poverty, leading to the neglect of large areas of Europe.
That is a real enough danger to which policymakers must give serious thought as they reform the CAP on the basis of the following five pillars.
1.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; The EU needs a knowledge and innovation policy that strengthens European agriculture’s competitiveness.
Such a policy has been successful in the Netherlands, substantially contributing to the development and power of the country’s agribusiness.
Ten of 21 branches of Dutch agribusiness, including horticultural seeds, ornamentals, seed potatoes, and veal, are among the top contributors to the national economy and the country’s trade balance.
In the EU as a whole, a policy directed toward research programs stimulating scientific excellence and greater coherence in the European knowledge system would greatly strengthen agriculture’s competitiveness and contribute to food security and sustainable development.
2.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Europe also needs a restructuring policy for land use.
Many structural improvement programs have been financed at the European level, but agricultural production and land use are not among them.
The development of an Agricultural Main Structure would compliment the European Ecological Main Structure.
Reforestation and the repair of natural ecosystems should also be part of a land use policy.
3.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A policy for European food systems would treat production, processing, distribution, logistics, and retailing in combination.
Consumption patterns and preferences are an integral part of such systems.
Preliminary studies by the European Science Foundation’s “Forward Look on European Food Systems” could prove useful in devising an EU-wide policy.
4.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Metropolitan agriculture in a rapidly urbanizing world can provide high-quality produce on small amounts of land.
It offers an answer to rising demand for healthy food with minimal environmental side effects.
5.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A new CAP should include a policy to safeguard Europe’s landscapes.
But a cultural heritage should not be maintained everywhere, nor should it ignore cost.
And it should not be a defensive policy of the sort that tends to concentrate on poor-quality land.
These five pillars involve drastic choices, but they will probably require less money from Europe’s taxpayers, not more.
They could make a real contribution to cleaner, more productive, and efficient farming and land use, while addressing social needs.
A Breakthrough Against Hunger
NEW YORK – Today’s world hunger crisis is unprecedentedly severe and requires urgent measures.
Nearly one billion people are trapped in chronic hunger – perhaps 100 million more than two years ago.
Spain is taking global leadership in combating hunger by inviting world leaders to Madrid in late January to move beyond words to action.
With Spain’s leadership and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s partnership, several donor governments are proposing to pool their financial resources so that the world’s poorest farmers can grow more food and escape the poverty trap.
The benefits of some donor help can be remarkable.
Peasant farmers in Africa, Haiti, and other impoverished regions currently plant their crops without the benefit of high-yield seed varieties and fertilizers.
The result is a grain yield (for example, maize) that is roughly one-third less than what could be achieved with better farm inputs.
African farmers produce roughly one ton of grain per hectare, compared with more than four tons per hectare in China, where farmers use fertilizers heavily.
African farmers know that they need fertilizer; they just can’t afford it.
With donor help, they can.
Not only do these farmers then feed their families, but they also can begin to earn market income and to save for the future.
By building up savings over a few years, the farmers eventually become creditworthy, or have enough cash to purchase vitally necessary inputs on their own.
There is now widespread agreement on the need for increased donor financing for small farmers (those with two hectares or less of land, or impoverished pastoralists), which is especially urgent in Africa.
The UN Secretary General led a steering group last year that determined that African agriculture needs around $8 billion per year in donor financing – roughly four times the current total – with a heavy emphasis on improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation systems, and extension training.
In addition to direct help for small farms, donors should provide more help for the research and development needed to identify new high-yielding seed varieties, especially to breed plants that can withstand temporary flooding, excess nitrogen, salty soils, crop pests, and other challenges to sustainable food production.
Helping the poor with today’s technologies, while investing in future improved technologies, is the optimum division of labor.
This investment pays off wonderfully, with research centers such as the International Rice Research Institute and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre providing the high-yield seeds and innovative farming strategies that together triggered the Asian Green Revolution.
These centers are not household names, but they deserve to be.
Their scientific breakthroughs have helped to feed the world, and we’ll need more of them.
Dozens of low-income, food-deficit countries, perhaps as many as 40-50, have elaborated urgent programs for increased food production by small farms, but are currently held back by the lack of donor funding.
These countries have appealed to the World Bank for financing, and the Bank made a valiant effort in 2008 to help through its new Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFCRP).
But the Bank does not yet have sufficient funds to meet these countries’ urgent needs, and has had to ration assistance to a small fraction of the flows that could be effectively and reliably used.
Hundreds of millions of people, in the meantime, remain trapped in hunger.
Many individual donor countries have declared that they are now prepared to increase their financial support for smallholder agriculture, but are searching for the appropriate mechanisms to do so.
The current aid structures are inadequate.
The more than 20 bilateral and multilateral donor agencies for agriculture are highly fragmented and of insufficient scale individually and collectively.
Despite the dedicated efforts of many professionals, the response to the hunger crisis remains utterly inadequate.
The 2008 planting seasons came and went with much too little additional help for impoverished small farmers.
African countries search endlessly, and mostly fruitlessly, for the small amounts of funding needed for their purchases of fertilizer and improved seeds.
My colleagues and I, serving on an advisory committee for the Spanish initiative, have recommended that donors pool their funds into a single international account, which we call the Financial Coordination Mechanism (FCM).
These pooled funds would enable farmers in poor countries to obtain the fertilizer, improved seed varieties, and small-scale irrigation equipment that they urgently need.
Poor countries would receive prompt and predictable financing for agricultural inputs from a single account, rather than from dozens of distinct and fragmented donors.
By pooling financial resources into a single-donor FCM, aid programs’ administrative costs could be kept low, the availability of aid flows could be assured, and poor countries would not have to negotiate 25 times in order to receive help. 
The time for business as usual is over.
The donors promised to double aid to Africa by 2010, but are still far off track.
Indeed, during the past 20 years, they actually cut aid for agriculture programs, and only now are reversing course.
Meanwhile, a billion people go hungry each day.
We need a breakthrough that is demonstrable, public, clear, and convincing, that can mobilize the public’s hearts and minds, and that can demonstrate success.
History can be made in Madrid at the end of January, when the world’s richest and poorest countries converge to seek solutions to the global hunger crisis.
The lives of the billion poorest people depend on it.
A Breakthrough Opportunity for Global Health
NEW YORK – Every year, millions of people die from preventable and treatable diseases, especially in poor countries.
In many cases, lifesaving medicines can be cheaply mass-produced, but are sold at prices that block access to those who need them.
And many die simply because there are no cures or vaccines, because so little of the world’s valuable research talent and limited resources is devoted to addressing the diseases of the poor.
This state of affairs represents a failure of economics and law that urgently needs to be corrected.
The good news is that there are now opportunities for change, most promisingly through an international effort headed by the World Health Organization that would begin to fix the broken intellectual-property regime that is holding back the development and availability of cheap drugs.
Two main problems limit the availability of medicines today.
One is that they are very costly; or, more accurately, the price charged for them is very high, though the cost of producing them is but a fraction of that amount.
Second, drug development is geared toward maximizing profit, not social benefit, which skews efforts directed at the creation of medicines that are essential to human welfare.
Because the poor have so little money to spend, drug companies, under current arrangements, have little incentive to do research on the diseases that afflict them.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
Drug companies argue that high prices are necessary to fund research and development.
But, in the United States, it is actually the government that finances most health-related research and development – directly, through public support (National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation), and indirectly, through public purchases of medicine, both in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Even the part that is not government-financed is not a conventional market; most individuals’ purchases of prescription medicines are covered by insurance.
Government finances health-care research because improved medicines are a public good.
The resulting knowledge benefits everyone by stopping epidemics and limiting the economic and human toll of widespread illness.
Efficiency requires sharing research as widely as possible as soon as it is available.
Thomas Jefferson compared knowledge to candles: when one is used to light another, it does not diminish the light of the first.
On the contrary, everything becomes brighter.
Yet, in America and most of the world, drug prices are still exorbitant and the spread of knowledge is tightly limited.
That is because we have created a patent system that gives innovators a temporary monopoly over what they create, which encourages them to hoard their knowledge, lest they help a competitor.
While this system does provide incentives for certain kinds of research by making innovation profitable, it allows drug companies to drive up prices, and the incentives do not necessarily correspond to social returns.
In the health-care sector, it may be more profitable to devote research to a “me-too” drug than to the development of a treatment that really makes a difference.
The patent system may even have adverse effects on innovation, because, while the most important input into any research is prior ideas, the patent system encourages secrecy.
A solution to both high prices and misdirected research is to replace the current model with a government-supported prize fund.
With a prize system, innovators are rewarded for new knowledge, but they do not retain a monopoly on its use.
That way, the power of competitive markets can ensure that, once a drug is developed, it is made available at the lowest possible price – not at an inflated monopoly price.
Fortunately, some US lawmakers are taking a strong interest in this approach.
The Prize Fund for HIV/AIDS Act, a congressional bill introduced by Senator Bernie Sanders, is just such an initiative.
His bill also contains an important provision aimed at encouraging open-source research, which would move the current research model away from secrecy toward sharing.
But, globally, our innovation system needs much bigger changes.
The WHO’s efforts to encourage broad reforms at the international level are crucial.
This spring, the WHO released a report that recommends solutions similar to those proposed in the US Senate bill, but on a global level.
Importantly, the report, “Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing Countries,” recommends a comprehensive approach, including mandatory funding contributions from governments for research on developing countries’ health needs; international coordination of health-care priorities and implementation; and a global observatory that would monitor where needs are greatest.
In late May, the international community will have a chance to begin implementing these ideas at the WHO World Health Assembly – a moment of hope for public health around the world.
Reforming our innovation system is not just a matter of economics.
It is, in many cases, a matter of life and death.
It is therefore essential to de-link R&amp;D incentives from drug prices, and to promote greater sharing of scientific knowledge.
For America, the Sanders bill marks important progress.
For the world, the WHO’s recommendations represent a once-in-a-generation opportunity to remedy a long-standing and egregious inequity in health care, and, more broadly, to set a model for governance of global public goods befitting an era of globalization.
We cannot afford to let this opportunity pass us by.
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50% in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece, is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable?
If so, does enlarging the euro’s membership really serve Europe’s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency.
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that, at least for large countries, currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders.
At a minimum, currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone.
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell’s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were, the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment.
He credited another (future) Nobel Prize winner, James Meade, for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work, but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently, especially in the context of Europe’s nascent integration.
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises, but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever.
Not surprisingly, workers are leaving the eurozone’s crisis countries, but not necessarily for its stronger northern region.
Instead, Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau. Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania, which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain.
Still, if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell’s ideal, today we would not be seeing 25% unemployment in Spain while Germany’s unemployment rate is below 7%.
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union, which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration.
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960’s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber, a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk.
For a normal country, the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions.
In the US, when oil prices go up, incomes in Texas and Montana rise, which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget, thereby helping out the rest of the country.
Europe, of course, has no significant centralized tax authority, so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent.
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers, because any desired degree of risk sharing can, in theory, be achieved through financial markets.
This claim was hugely misguided.
Financial markets can be fragile, and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income, which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy.
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness.
But, in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels, the short term can stretch out for a very long time.
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube, much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century.
Indeed, more than 20 years on, Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification.
Later, Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that, in addition to fiscal transfers, a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort.
Otherwise, bank runs and debt panics will be rampant.
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks, but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities.
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld, and even of Mundell’s labor-mobility criterion, is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy, most likely involving region-wide popular elections.
Europe’s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework.
European policymakers today often complain that, were it not for the US financial crisis, the eurozone would be doing just fine.
Perhaps they are right. But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks, including big ones.
Europe may never be an “optimum” currency area by any standard.
But, without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.
A Century of Chinese Protests
The Global Economy’s New Path
WASHINGTON, DC – Whether we like it or not, the world around us is in a state of constant change.
But recent economic trends suggest that this change may be shifting its direction in a fundamental way.
Consider the advanced economies.
During the last two decades, economic growth in these countries was led by consumption – so much so that economic activity in these economies swung from investment to consumption by a total of 10 percentage points of GDP.
As a result, in 2010 the share of consumption in their GDP had reached 81.6%.
1990
2010
(In percent of GDP)
Advanced economies
Consumption
76.4
81.6
Investment
23.7
18.4
Emerging and developing economies
Consumption
73.4
67.1
Investment
26.0
30.8
Meanwhile, emerging markets and developing economies provided almost a mirror image of this trend, raising their investment and boosting the supply of goods to the rest of the world at the cost of consumption in their own economies.
By 2010, the share of consumption in their GDP had declined, from 73.4% to 67.1%.
Looking forward, it is unlikely that the consumption share of GDP can increase further in advanced economies.
The main drivers of this increase were primarily financial engineering and wealth effects from strong asset prices.
Neither of these factors currently is at play to push consumption’s share of GDP higher.
But can the advanced economies’ consumption even be sustained at the current level?
Perhaps not.
Current levels of consumption are associated with over-extended governments and households, whose debt levels remain high, implying that more savings are required.
Banks also need to raise capital.
In general, many economic agents need an extended period of deleveraging.
However, current policies in the major advanced economies are aimed at maintaining current consumption levels in order to support growth and employment.
If the consumption share of GDP nonetheless declines, simple arithmetic tells us that investment and exports need to be higher to maintain total demand.
Should we expect emerging markets and developing economies to pick up the slack?
To sustain strong growth in these economies as external demand weakens, domestic demand needs to become the major engine of growth.
This means stronger domestic consumption and appropriate levels of investment to support such consumption growth.
In economies where investment levels are leading to excess capacity, resources could shift from investment to consumption, provided that these countries’ external accounts remain sustainable.
These are major tectonic shifts in the structure of the global economy, and are fraught with potential dangers.
The pace of change will vary between sectors and across economies, leading to mismatches of demand and supply worldwide.
Moreover, with globalization, an economic problem in one part of the world can be transmitted to the rest of the world more strongly, substantially complicating policy responses in both advanced and developing economies.
A study of such spillover effects by the International Monetary Fund suggests that, before the global financial crisis, external factors explained 36% of change in output in the five systemically important economies (the eurozone, the United States, China, Japan, and the United Kingdom); after the crisis, however, this share reached close to 60%.
In the rest of the world, including emerging markets, the share of external factors in output change increased from about 43% to more than 60%.
In this environment, we must diligently pursue policy coordination at the global level.
To achieve an orderly realignment of consumption and investment worldwide, policies that boost investment in one part of the world should match policies that boost consumption in other parts.
In particular, advanced economies should implement fundamental productivity-enhancing reforms, the eurozone should strengthen the currency union, and emerging market and developing economies should boost their domestic sources of growth.
And these policies should be consistent with fiscal and external stability.
Moreover, financial-sector policies and regulatory frameworks should be coordinated at the global level, in order to design and implement consensus-based rules – thereby addressing the problems posed by very large, global institutions that are considered too big or too complex to fail.
Only with such global coordination can we reduce, and possibly eliminate, economic instability and disorderly adjustments both at home and abroad, even as we seek to maximize the benefits of the inevitable changes in the global economy.
A Chinese Champion of Peace and Freedom
PRAGUE – On Christmas Day last year, one of China’s best-known human rights activists, the writer and university professor Liu Xiaobo, was condemned to 11 years in prison.
Liu is one of the main drafters of Charter 08, a petition inspired by Czechoslovakia’s Charter 77, calling on the Chinese government to adhere to its own laws and constitution, and demanding the open election of public officials, freedom of religion and expression, and the abolition of “subversion” laws.
For his bravery and clarity of thought about China’s future, Liu deserves the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
There are two reasons why we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of that prestigious award.
First and foremost, he stands in the tradition of Nobel Peace Prize laureates who have been recognized for their contribution to the struggle for human rights. Nobel laureates such as Martin Luther King, Lech Walesa, and Aung San Suu Kyi are but a few of the many examples that the Nobel Committee has recognized in previous years.
We are convinced that the concepts that Liu and his colleagues put down on paper in December 2008 are both universal and timeless.
These ideals – respect for human rights and human dignity, and the responsibility of citizens to ensure that their governments respect those rights – represent humanity’s highest aspirations.
Should the Nobel Committee choose to recognize Liu’s courage and sacrifice in articulating these ideals, it would not only draw global attention to the injustice of Liu’s 11-year sentence.
It would also help to amplify within China the universal and humanistic values for which Liu has spent so much of his life fighting.
The second reason why Liu deserves the Nobel Peace Prize resonates with Alfred Nobel’s original intent for the award.
In working to promote human rights, political reform, and democratization in China, Liu has made a significant contribution to the values of peace and fraternity among nations that Nobel had in mind when he created the award more than a century ago.
Of course, democratization does not automatically guarantee better behavior on the world stage. But it does facilitate a full and rigorous public debate over key questions of a state’s foreign and domestic policies.
This active and searching conversation, the hallmark of a democratic polity, is the best hope for better decisions by governments, both at home and abroad.
Liu’s committed advocacy on behalf of democracy in China is, above all, intended for the benefit of the Chinese people. But his courage and example may help to accelerate the dawn of the day when China’s participation in international affairs is aided by the expertise and oversight of civil-society groups, an independent media, and an engaged citizenry able to express its views through the ballot box.
It is primarily for these two reasons that we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
In conferring on Liu one of the world’s highest honors, the Committee would be signaling once again the importance of human rights and democracy on the one hand, and world peace and international solidarity on the other.
Liu’s harsh prison sentence was meant as an exemplary measure, a stern warning to all other Chinese who might want to follow his path.
We are convinced that there are moments when exemplary civic engagement, such as Liu’s, requires an exemplary response.
Awarding him the Nobel Peace Prize is precisely the response that his courage deserves.
A Civilization in Crisis
A Clarion Call for Emerging Markets
ITHACA – With 2012 underway, it is worth reflecting on how a decade of strong economic growth in emerging markets led to last year’s resounding political transformations.
From the dramatic events in the Middle East, to the groundswell of support for the anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare in India, leaders in emerging markets are getting a clear message from the streets that growth is not everything.
They ignore this message at their peril.
Emerging-market economies delivered solid growth during the 2000’s, and even survived the global financial crisis without a growth collapse. But the specter of rising corruption is compromising the legitimacy of their economic gains and eroding support for further reforms needed to sustain their growth momentum.
Corruption takes many forms, but, in emerging markets, a combination of factors has turned it into a cancer that ultimately topples regimes.
Relentless low-level corruption is a major irritant for poor people in many of these countries; indeed, it limits their access to the social services and basic government functions that they often depend upon for their very survival.
Another type of corruption involves siphoning enormous sums of money from large-scale projects.
In India, for example, the government lost as much as $30-40 billion of much-needed revenue when coveted band spectrum was sold through a rigged auction.
For ordinary people, large-scale corruption is less visible, because, while the sums involved are mind-boggling, the costs are not as directly felt as they are in the case of lower-level graft. But the perception of this type of mega-corruption has changed as rapid growth has increased inequality.
In countries like China and India, rapid economic growth has lifted a huge number of people out of poverty. But the fruits of globalization and rapid growth have not been evenly shared – the rich become super-rich, even as a large fraction of the population remains destitute.
Rising income inequality is hardly limited to emerging markets, but their combination of open corruption and pervasive inequities creates a toxic brew that is undermining support for reforms that would strengthen and consolidate their economic gains.
In many emerging markets, a lack of political freedom adds to the combustible mix.
The combination of corruption, inequality, and political repression builds up enormous pressure, and there are no institutional channels through which to release it.
But freer political regimes are not a panacea.
In a democracy like India’s, the politically well-connected benefit from skewed growth, thus increasing the resentment of those left behind.
The opportunity to “throw the rascals out” in each election cycle helps to let off some steam, but it does not resolve the problems that are generating it.
It is difficult to predict what triggers popular protest, but economic factors are key.
For example, rising food prices tend to hurt the poor, especially the urban poor, who spend a large share of their income on food; unlike agricultural workers, they receive none of the benefits of higher food prices.
With swelling urban populations, it will become increasingly difficult to keep a lid on these pressures.
Some governments have reacted to recent events with political repression, information blackouts, or a combination of authoritarian measures.
China, for example, blocked media coverage of the Egyptian protests.
The Arab Spring, however, reveals the fragility of repressive political regimes that try to maintain their legitimacy by limiting information flows.
The main lesson for dynamic emerging-market countries is that an exclusive focus on GDP growth may ultimately not be good for economic and political stability.
Even with rapid increases in national income, if these countries’ leaders do not distribute the benefits fairly, they will become vulnerable to popular discontent.
Tackling corruption is critical to improving long-term growth and maintaining social stability.
These economies need measures that help to keep the poor out of poverty traps, and that give them realistic opportunities to improve their economic well-being.
Such steps include broadening financial markets to give more people access to credit and investment, strengthening social safety nets to protect the economically vulnerable, and improving educational access and quality.
These lessons apply equally to advanced economies, which also suffer from rising inequality and subtle forms of corruption. But, for those wealthy economies, restoring decent growth is now the major priority.
Emerging markets have a golden opportunity to build on their economic gains and lock in growth and stability by tackling deep-seated problems like corruption.
As the past year’s events have shown, the costs of inaction could be calamitous.
A Clockwork Chemistry
OXFORD – In Anthony Burgess’s novella (and Stanley Kubrick’s film) A Clockwork Orange, Alex, an unrepentant psychopath, has his eyes pried wide open and is forced to watch violent images.
Like Pavlov’s dog, Alex is being programmed to respond with nausea to violence and sex.
This scene remains shocking, but, like most science fiction, it has aged.
The behaviorist psychology it drew upon has long expired, and the fear that science will be used to make, or even force, people to be morally better now sounds old-fashioned.
Science fiction ages fast, but it has a long afterlife.
Over the past decade, an army of psychologists, neuroscientists, and evolutionary biologists has been busy trying to uncover the neural “clockwork” that underlies human morality.
They have started to trace the evolutionary origins of pro-social sentiments such as empathy, and have begun to uncover the genes that dispose some individuals to senseless violence and others to acts of altruism, and the pathways in our brain that shape our ethical decisions.
And to understand how something works is also to begin to see ways to modify and even control it.
Indeed, scientists have not only identified some of the brain pathways that shape our ethical decisions, but also chemical substances that modulate this neural activity.
A recent study has shown that the anti-depressant Citalopram can change the responses of individuals to hypothetical moral dilemma scenarios.
Individuals given the drug were less willing to sacrifice an individual to save the lives of several others.
Another series of studies has shown that when the hormone oxytocin is administered via nasal spray, it increases trusting and cooperative behavior within social groups, but also decreases cooperation with those perceived as outsiders.
Neuroscientists have even magnetically “zapped” carefully targeted areas of people’s brains to influence their moral judgments in surprising ways – for example, making it easier for them to lie.
Of course, no one is developing a “moral pill” that will transform us into saints.
But the research is advancing fast, and it is almost certain to suggest new ways to reshape our moral intuitions, sentiments, and motivations.
Should we use our growing scientific understanding of the basis of human morality to try to make people morally better?
A Clockwork Orange was accused of glorifying violence, and some of its scenes are still hard to watch.
But as Burgess himself argued, the novella has an almost Christian message: what makes us human is our freedom to choose both good and evil, and for society to crush individuals into servile conformity is as wicked as, and perhaps even worse than, the sadism of psychopaths like Alex.
I suspect that many will agree with this view. They will agree that our ability to distinguish right from wrong is something precious that we should safeguard, not a broken clock that scientists should fix.
Of course, most of us don’t need to be conditioned to feel repulsed by rape or torture.
But this does not mean that we are morally good, or good enough.
As you read this, perfectly ordinary people somewhere in the world are doing unspeakable things to others.
Even in the most advanced and affluent societies, a vast concentrated effort is needed to preserve even minimal decency: think of locks, security alarms, police, courts, and prisons.
And it is doubtful that we really care enough about others, or give enough to the less fortunate.
Humans are born with the capacity to be moral, but it is a limited capacity which is ill equipped to deal with the ethical complexities of the modern world.
For thousands of years, humans have relied on education, persuasion, social institutions, and the threat of real (or supernatural) punishment to make people behave decently.
We could all be morally better, but it is clear that this traditional approach cannot take us much further.
It is not as if people would suddenly begin to behave better if we just gave them more facts and statistics, or better arguments.
So we shouldn’t be too quick to dismiss the suggestion that science might help – in the first instance, by helping us design more effective institutions, more inspiring moral education, or more persuasive ethical arguments.
But science might also offer more direct ways of influencing our brains.
Science fiction sometimes limits rather than expands our sense of what is possible.
It would be self-defeating, or worse, to try to promote morality through brutal coercion.
Governments must not be given the power to control its citizens’ moral code – we know that if they had such power, they would misuse it.
It would be ideal if individuals could freely explore different ways to improve themselves, whether by practicing mindfulness, reading moral philosophy, or, yes, by taking a ’morality’ pill.
But it is also true that although some people are eager to take pills that make them feel better or think faster, it is not so obvious that people would really want to take pills that would make them morally better.
It is not clear that people really want to be morally better.
And those who, like the psychopathic Alex, need the most help are probably those who would want it least.
These are, of course, hypothetical questions.
We don’t yet know what is possible. But it is better to begin the ethical discussion too early than too late.
And even if “moral pills” are just science fiction, they raise deep questions.
Will we want to take them if they ever become available?
And what does it say about us if we won’t?
A Cloud over Airplane Safety
PRINCETON – When airports across Europe reopened after the closure caused by the eruption of Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano, it was not because the amount of ash in the atmosphere had dropped, but because the risk that the ash posed to airplane safety had been reassessed.
Was it new scientific information that led to the lifting of the flight ban, or was it a reflection of the hardship, both personal and economic, that the ban was causing?
Over six days, about 95,000 flights were canceled, at a cost to airlines of more than $1 billion.
An estimated five million people were stranded or delayed.
The British economy lost £1.5 billion, and others were similarly affected.
Flower growers in Kenya, who depend on air transport to take their short-lived product to Europe, suddenly had no income.
Sixteen cancer patients in critical need of bone marrow for transplants were put at risk because the matching marrow could not be flown in from the United States or Canada.
In the past, jets flying into ash from volcanoes in the US, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Mexico have temporarily lost engine power, and in one case, dropped thousands of feet, although all managed to land safely.
But there was no evidence that the more widely dispersed ash blowing over Europe from Iceland would cause similar problems.
The decision to ground flights was based on the view that any level of ash in the atmosphere posed some risk to aircraft, and that no matter how slight that risk might be, the government’s job was, as British Prime Minister Gordon Brown put it, “to make sure that safety was paramount.”
Indeed, in closing their skies, European governments seem to have given safety absolute priority over everything else.
Yet none of them act on that principle in other areas.
Some 3,000 people die on the world’s roads every day.
Cutting speed limits to, say, 10 kilometers per hour would prevent most accidents and save many lives.
We don’t do it, because we give safety a lower priority than our desire to spend less time driving.
The price we are willing to pay for safety cannot be infinite.
It is distasteful to put a price on human life, but the more we spend on safety, the less we will have for our other goals.
The British government uses a figure of a little more than £1 million as a general limit to the amount it is prepared to pay to save a statistical life – for example, by improving road safety.
In the US, the Department of Transportation is prepared to go up to $5.8 million – nearly four times as much, at current exchange rates – for the same purpose.
Does that mean that safety is paramount in the US, but not in Britain?
Giovanni Bisignani, the head of the International Air Transport Association, an industry group, criticized the shutdown, saying that no risk assessment had been undertaken.
On the whole, though, the public seemed to support the decision.
Stranded travelers, interviewed at airports, typically said that they would rather be stuck at an airport than in a plane falling out of the sky.
But what if some travelers have a higher tolerance of risk, or just a more urgent need to travel, than others?
John Stuart Mill, in his classic book On Liberty, considered a situation in which a man sets out to cross a bridge that we know is unsafe.
In Mill’s view, we are justified in stopping him only to make sure that he is aware of the danger.
Once he knows of it, the decision is his to make, because only he can judge the importance of his journey, and balance that against the risk he is running.
Air safety is slightly different, because a crashing plane can kill people on the ground, but the greatest risks by far are borne by the passengers and crew.
If they are fully informed of the risks, and are still willing to fly – perhaps the crew has been offered more money, as workers in dangerous occupations often are – should we prevent them from making the decision to fly?
In the end, after test flights with no passengers aboard had shown no engine damage, and aircraft engine manufacturers told aviation authorities that their engines could operate safely with a low level of ash in the atmosphere, Europe’s skies were reopened.
The International Civil Aviation Authority has announced that it will convene a group of experts to help it provide guidance for the industry to decide what level of ash in the atmosphere makes it unsafe to fly.
Now that we have seen the costs of giving absolute priority to safety, we know that this is not only a technical question.
I trust that among the experts will be some who have pondered the underlying ethical question: how safe should we aim to be?
A Communist Party without Communism
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed him in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia’s leaders have not changed a whit.
It looks increasingly likely that, as under Leonid Brezhnev, we will see the same names in the news for decades to come.
According to Gleb Pavlovsky, the Putin regime’s leading ideologist, the current Russian system is perfect in all respects but one: it doesn’t know its enemies.
Indeed, it seems as if everyone in the Kremlin is reading Carl Schmitt, the Nazi legal theorist who taught that naming your enemy is the central mission of politics.
In the spirit of Schmitt, Putin’s men designated a liberal party, the Union of Right Forces, as their ur-enemy.
Its public meetings were broken up by armed police; its leaders arrested and beaten; Putin called its supporters “coyotes.”
What is surprising is that this aggressive behavior occurred in response to no visible danger.
Oil prices are soaring, as are Putin’s approval ratings.
His appointees control everything that matters, from Gazprom to the Central Electoral Committee.
Since the pacification of Chechnya with violence and subsidies, the incarceration or emigration of a few financially viable opponents, and the massive “social investments” of recent years, which, under Medvedev’s personal supervision, have bribed the population, no credible force can seriously challenge Putin’s men.
Yet their regime is in crisis, and they know it.
Russia’s economy is more dependent on gas and oil than ever before.
Military reform has been reversed.
Despite increasing incomes, Russians are less educated and less healthy than they were when Putin came to power; they still die at a shockingly young age.
Russian involvement in world affairs is tainted by poison and corruption.
State monopolies undo what private businesses created.
With more money, ill-educated bureaucrats hire more ill-educated bureaucrats; as a result, the regime fails to rule the country.
The country is unruly, and its rulers know it.
So they panic.
Putin’s aim was to subject all power to the control of Russia’s security forces.
His generation of KGB officers watched the collapse of the Communist Party and all the governmental bodies that it “directed and controlled,” including the KGB.
Under Putin, the security service has had its revenge.
Its people have become powerful, arrogant, and enormously rich.
They have also become disobedient.
In 2004, General Viktor Cherkesov, then Putin’s representative in northwest Russia, published an essay that glorified the KGB as the only unspoiled authority in a corrupted country.
This essay, more than anything else, defined Putin’s second term.
In October 2007, Cherkesov (now chief of one of the most obscure and powerful services, the Federal Anti-Drug Administration) published another essay in which he lamented his colleagues’ degradation: warriors had turned into traders, he complained.
Earlier, generals from a competing service, the FSB, had arrested Cherkesov’s deputy for “illegal bugging.”
In a public gesture of despair, Cherkesov admitted the failure of Putin’s project to reanimate Russian governance by subordinating it to the security services.
Cherkesov’s deputy remains in prison.
Most believe that Putin is unable to intervene in his defense.
In the absence of Communist Party control, these security officers betrayed their corporate ethic and engaged in horse-trading, applying force when a trade did not go well.
That this happens to ordinary Russians is clear; what Cherkesov revealed was that Putin’s circle also confronts this situation.
What is to be done when ex-KGB warriors turn their swords and bugs against one another?
Cherkesov’s case exemplifies Putin’s nightmare.
But if your instincts betray you, you go back to even deeper ones.
Now that Putin’s people have left their predecessors’ neo-liberal ideas behind and feel disenchanted with the ex-KGB clique, the task is to recreate an omnipresent political party that controls the security services, the administration, business, and much else.
This party will be centralized under personal leadership and will reduce the state to a legal fiction.
Preaching nationalism, its managers will believe in their universal competence, as opposed to KGB-style professionalism and corporatism.
Boris Yeltsin forbade party cells in state-controlled institutions by decree.
Putin’s lawyers will reverse that decision; the party will have cells or committees in every factory, corporation, military unit, university department, etc. Integrated by the leader’s charisma and party discipline, party members will direct and unify the desolated country.
This is Putin’s plan.
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, the only other KGB man to rule Russia, Putin will become the party’s general secretary.
As in the Soviet era, state and governmental officials will be reduced to party ciphers – the role that President Medvedev will play under General Secretary Putin.
And, of course, being General Secretary carries no constitutional term limit.
In the end, Putin has what history left him: not ideas, just a faction yearning to consolidate its grip on power.
Lenin and Trotsky needed a party to make their ideology a reality; Putin and Medvedev are devising an ideology to solidify their party.
It is a bizarre ideology.
Accusing warriors of being traders and traders of being thieves, it shuns its Marxist origins.
It will subordinate all who really do work – traders, warriors, journalists, and others – to party ideologues whose sole job is to search for enemies.
A Confederal Solution for Palestine
LONDON – Last month, while in New York City, I happened to be staying in the same hotel as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
To accommodate his security needs, the hotel had been converted into a fortress, much like Israel itself.
Netanyahu was in the United States for yet another round of Middle East peace talks.
The US offered various sweeteners to induce Israel to freeze its West Bank settlement construction for another 90 days.
The Israelis refused; another impasse was reached.
What, then, might be the prospects of a negotiated peace between two peoples with claims to the same land?
The answer is: very poor.
All peace efforts since the Oslo accords of 1993 have been based on the “two-state solution,” according to which Israel is supposed to turn over the occupied territories to a Palestinian state, the Palestinians are supposed to renounce any claims on the Jewish state, and everyone is supposed to live happily ever after.
A negotiated “land for peace” solution still remains official Western doctrine.
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech, “a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace” has to be based on “two states for two peoples.”
Meanwhile, the two main parties to the dispute, Palestine and Israel, are searching for unilateral alternatives to the stymied “peace process.”
The Palestinians are pushing for international recognition of their statehood, while the Israelis are using their settlement policy to preempt a Palestinian state.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that, if the latest peace talks collapse, he will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
This month, Brazil and Argentina recognized “Palestine,” and a cascade of Latin American countries is expected to follow.
Abbas is now setting his sights on Europe, and would ask Turkey to serve as a go-between.
The game is to use international recognition of an independent Palestinian state to pressure the US to retreat from its almost unconditional support for Israeli policy.
Israel’s main concern continues to be security.
The official Western doctrine is that Israel’s long-term security depends on the success of the “peace process.”
In practice, Israel has been taking other measures to secure its future.
Media attention has been focused on the “security wall,” which has certainly succeeded in reducing the level of violence.
But, to the hawks who now control Israeli politics, the key to Israel’s security depends on depth of defense, for which expansion of the settlements is indispensable.
The hawks’ recipe for survival is threefold: continued military and economic support from the US, defensible frontiers through a strategic settlement program, and the carve-up of the Palestinian West Bank into disconnected bantustans, or subordinate authorities, incapable of concerted opposition to Israeli policy.
Thus, while Abbas seeks to create a new “fact on the ground” by drumming up international support for a Palestinian state, Israel aims to trump him by making such a state unviable.
The ideal alternative to both strategies is a peace process that aims not to create two states, but rather to establish the political and economic basis for a single confederal state.
Indeed, the two-state solution was always an illusion.
There was never enough land to satisfy the passionate possessiveness of all those with claims to it. And, over time, Israeli settler disengagement from the West Bank and East Jerusalem has become just as impossible as any attempt by Israel to expel its remaining Arabs.
Israeli Jews are bound to stay in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and Israeli Arabs are bound to stay in Israel proper.
These are the “facts on the ground” that doom Palestinian hopes for a sovereign Palestinian state no less than Israeli hopes for a wholly Jewish state.
Moreover, land for peace never made sense from an economic point of view.
If compensation for wrongs to the Palestinians was to be the guiding principle, there were always better ways of going about it than to found a rickety, poverty-ridden new country dependent on foreign aid.
Most people have forgotten that the Paris Protocols of April 1994 established a customs union between Israel and the occupied territories, with a joint Economic Council to adjudicate trade disputes.
The free movement of goods, labor, and capital between the two parts could have given a tremendous economic boost to Palestinian GDP.
It could also have been the basis of a confederal state, whose Palestinian part would have benefited from the West Bank settlers’ productivity and taxes. But this benign prospect was undermined by the violence needed to maintain the Jewish state and enable the emergence of a Palestinian one.
The official view remains that only an internationally guaranteed two-state settlement will bring about the security needed for the economic revival of the Palestinian territories. But it is just possible that unilateral Israeli policy, implicitly backed by the US, will create interim conditions of peace that are sufficient for economic growth to cool Palestinian nationalism.
The Palestinian cause is not the overriding preoccupation of even the Arab states, so Netanyahu’s strategy of defense in depth stands a better chance of success than Abbas’s pursuit of statehood through international recognition.
Netanyahu’s project is not moral. But that doesn’t mean that it won’t work, at least for a time.
A Confederation for Kosovo
Time is running out in Kosovo.
If a United Nations-backed settlement is not reached by early December, the province’s majority Albanian population is likely to declare independence unilaterally – a move that the United States has announced it may support.
That would be a disastrous step.
Russia would be furious, because it fears that Kosovo’s secession – whether or not it is internationally recognized – might fuel separatist movements in the former Soviet empire.
Serbia is even more strongly opposed.
Dusan Prorokovic, Serbia’s state secretary for Kosovo, has said that his country might use force to maintain its sovereignty.
Even if the government hesitates, ultranationalist groups might push Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to send in troops: the current UN presence in Kosovo is very thin (only 40 “military observers” and 2,116 policemen) but the stationing of 15,000 NATO troops could make any armed clash very dangerous.
After eight years of international administration, Kosovo’s Albanian majority has tasted freedom and is eager for full independence.