4.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Metropolitan agriculture in a rapidly urbanizing world can provide high-quality produce on small amounts of land.
It offers an answer to rising demand for healthy food with minimal environmental side effects.
5.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A new CAP should include a policy to safeguard Europe’s landscapes.
But a cultural heritage should not be maintained everywhere, nor should it ignore cost.
And it should not be a defensive policy of the sort that tends to concentrate on poor-quality land.
These five pillars involve drastic choices, but they will probably require less money from Europe’s taxpayers, not more.
They could make a real contribution to cleaner, more productive, and efficient farming and land use, while addressing social needs.
A Breakthrough Against Hunger
NEW YORK – Today’s world hunger crisis is unprecedentedly severe and requires urgent measures.
Nearly one billion people are trapped in chronic hunger – perhaps 100 million more than two years ago. Spain is taking global leadership in combating hunger by inviting world leaders to Madrid in late January to move beyond words to action.
With Spain’s leadership and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s partnership, several donor governments are proposing to pool their financial resources so that the world’s poorest farmers can grow more food and escape the poverty trap.
The benefits of some donor help can be remarkable.
Peasant farmers in Africa, Haiti, and other impoverished regions currently plant their crops without the benefit of high-yield seed varieties and fertilizers.
The result is a grain yield (for example, maize) that is roughly one-third less than what could be achieved with better farm inputs.
African farmers produce roughly one ton of grain per hectare, compared with more than four tons per hectare in China, where farmers use fertilizers heavily.
African farmers know that they need fertilizer; they just can’t afford it.
With donor help, they can.
Not only do these farmers then feed their families, but they also can begin to earn market income and to save for the future.
By building up savings over a few years, the farmers eventually become creditworthy, or have enough cash to purchase vitally necessary inputs on their own.
There is now widespread agreement on the need for increased donor financing for small farmers (those with two hectares or less of land, or impoverished pastoralists), which is especially urgent in Africa.
The UN Secretary General led a steering group last year that determined that African agriculture needs around $8 billion per year in donor financing – roughly four times the current total – with a heavy emphasis on improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation systems, and extension training.
In addition to direct help for small farms, donors should provide more help for the research and development needed to identify new high-yielding seed varieties, especially to breed plants that can withstand temporary flooding, excess nitrogen, salty soils, crop pests, and other challenges to sustainable food production.
Helping the poor with today’s technologies, while investing in future improved technologies, is the optimum division of labor.
This investment pays off wonderfully, with research centers such as the International Rice Research Institute and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre providing the high-yield seeds and innovative farming strategies that together triggered the Asian Green Revolution.
These centers are not household names, but they deserve to be. Their scientific breakthroughs have helped to feed the world, and we’ll need more of them.
Dozens of low-income, food-deficit countries, perhaps as many as 40-50, have elaborated urgent programs for increased food production by small farms, but are currently held back by the lack of donor funding.
These countries have appealed to the World Bank for financing, and the Bank made a valiant effort in 2008 to help through its new Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFCRP). But the Bank does not yet have sufficient funds to meet these countries’ urgent needs, and has had to ration assistance to a small fraction of the flows that could be effectively and reliably used.
Hundreds of millions of people, in the meantime, remain trapped in hunger.
Many individual donor countries have declared that they are now prepared to increase their financial support for smallholder agriculture, but are searching for the appropriate mechanisms to do so.
The current aid structures are inadequate.
The more than 20 bilateral and multilateral donor agencies for agriculture are highly fragmented and of insufficient scale individually and collectively.
Despite the dedicated efforts of many professionals, the response to the hunger crisis remains utterly inadequate.
The 2008 planting seasons came and went with much too little additional help for impoverished small farmers.
African countries search endlessly, and mostly fruitlessly, for the small amounts of funding needed for their purchases of fertilizer and improved seeds.
My colleagues and I, serving on an advisory committee for the Spanish initiative, have recommended that donors pool their funds into a single international account, which we call the Financial Coordination Mechanism (FCM).
These pooled funds would enable farmers in poor countries to obtain the fertilizer, improved seed varieties, and small-scale irrigation equipment that they urgently need.
Poor countries would receive prompt and predictable financing for agricultural inputs from a single account, rather than from dozens of distinct and fragmented donors.
By pooling financial resources into a single-donor FCM, aid programs’ administrative costs could be kept low, the availability of aid flows could be assured, and poor countries would not have to negotiate 25 times in order to receive help. 
The time for business as usual is over.
The donors promised to double aid to Africa by 2010, but are still far off track.
Indeed, during the past 20 years, they actually cut aid for agriculture programs, and only now are reversing course.
Meanwhile, a billion people go hungry each day.
We need a breakthrough that is demonstrable, public, clear, and convincing, that can mobilize the public’s hearts and minds, and that can demonstrate success.
History can be made in Madrid at the end of January, when the world’s richest and poorest countries converge to seek solutions to the global hunger crisis.
The lives of the billion poorest people depend on it.
A Breakthrough Opportunity for Global Health
NEW YORK – Every year, millions of people die from preventable and treatable diseases, especially in poor countries.
In many cases, lifesaving medicines can be cheaply mass-produced, but are sold at prices that block access to those who need them.
And many die simply because there are no cures or vaccines, because so little of the world’s valuable research talent and limited resources is devoted to addressing the diseases of the poor.
This state of affairs represents a failure of economics and law that urgently needs to be corrected.
The good news is that there are now opportunities for change, most promisingly through an international effort headed by the World Health Organization that would begin to fix the broken intellectual-property regime that is holding back the development and availability of cheap drugs.
Two main problems limit the availability of medicines today.
One is that they are very costly; or, more accurately, the price charged for them is very high, though the cost of producing them is but a fraction of that amount. Second, drug development is geared toward maximizing profit, not social benefit, which skews efforts directed at the creation of medicines that are essential to human welfare.
Because the poor have so little money to spend, drug companies, under current arrangements, have little incentive to do research on the diseases that afflict them.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
Drug companies argue that high prices are necessary to fund research and development.
But, in the United States, it is actually the government that finances most health-related research and development – directly, through public support (National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation), and indirectly, through public purchases of medicine, both in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Even the part that is not government-financed is not a conventional market; most individuals’ purchases of prescription medicines are covered by insurance.
Government finances health-care research because improved medicines are a public good. The resulting knowledge benefits everyone by stopping epidemics and limiting the economic and human toll of widespread illness.
Efficiency requires sharing research as widely as possible as soon as it is available.
Thomas Jefferson compared knowledge to candles: when one is used to light another, it does not diminish the light of the first.
On the contrary, everything becomes brighter.
Yet, in America and most of the world, drug prices are still exorbitant and the spread of knowledge is tightly limited.
That is because we have created a patent system that gives innovators a temporary monopoly over what they create, which encourages them to hoard their knowledge, lest they help a competitor.
While this system does provide incentives for certain kinds of research by making innovation profitable, it allows drug companies to drive up prices, and the incentives do not necessarily correspond to social returns. In the health-care sector, it may be more profitable to devote research to a “me-too” drug than to the development of a treatment that really makes a difference.
The patent system may even have adverse effects on innovation, because, while the most important input into any research is prior ideas, the patent system encourages secrecy.
A solution to both high prices and misdirected research is to replace the current model with a government-supported prize fund.
With a prize system, innovators are rewarded for new knowledge, but they do not retain a monopoly on its use.
That way, the power of competitive markets can ensure that, once a drug is developed, it is made available at the lowest possible price – not at an inflated monopoly price.
Fortunately, some US lawmakers are taking a strong interest in this approach.
The Prize Fund for HIV/AIDS Act, a congressional bill introduced by Senator Bernie Sanders, is just such an initiative.
His bill also contains an important provision aimed at encouraging open-source research, which would move the current research model away from secrecy toward sharing.
But, globally, our innovation system needs much bigger changes.
The WHO’s efforts to encourage broad reforms at the international level are crucial.
This spring, the WHO released a report that recommends solutions similar to those proposed in the US Senate bill, but on a global level.

Importantly, the report, “Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing Countries,” recommends a comprehensive approach, including mandatory funding contributions from governments for research on developing countries’ health needs; international coordination of health-care priorities and implementation; and a global observatory that would monitor where needs are greatest. In late May, the international community will have a chance to begin implementing these ideas at the WHO World Health Assembly – a moment of hope for public health around the world.
Reforming our innovation system is not just a matter of economics.
It is, in many cases, a matter of life and death.
It is therefore essential to de-link R&amp;D incentives from drug prices, and to promote greater sharing of scientific knowledge.
For America, the Sanders bill marks important progress.
For the world, the WHO’s recommendations represent a once-in-a-generation opportunity to remedy a long-standing and egregious inequity in health care, and, more broadly, to set a model for governance of global public goods befitting an era of globalization.
We cannot afford to let this opportunity pass us by.
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50% in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece, is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable?
If so, does enlarging the euro’s membership really serve Europe’s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency.
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that, at least for large countries, currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders.
At a minimum, currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone.
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell’s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were, the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment. He credited another (future) Nobel Prize winner, James Meade, for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work, but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently, especially in the context of Europe’s nascent integration.
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises, but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever.
Not surprisingly, workers are leaving the eurozone’s crisis countries, but not necessarily for its stronger northern region.
Instead, Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau.
Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania, which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain.
Still, if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell’s ideal, today we would not be seeing 25% unemployment in Spain while Germany’s unemployment rate is below 7%.
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union, which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration.
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960’s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber, a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk.
For a normal country, the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions.
In the US, when oil prices go up, incomes in Texas and Montana rise, which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget, thereby helping out the rest of the country. Europe, of course, has no significant centralized tax authority, so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent.
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers, because any desired degree of risk sharing can, in theory, be achieved through financial markets.
This claim was hugely misguided.
Financial markets can be fragile, and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income, which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy.
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness.
But, in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels, the short term can stretch out for a very long time.
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube, much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century.
Indeed, more than 20 years on, Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification.
Later, Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that, in addition to fiscal transfers, a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort. Otherwise, bank runs and debt panics will be rampant.
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks, but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities.
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld, and even of Mundell’s labor-mobility criterion, is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy, most likely involving region-wide popular elections.
Europe’s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework.
European policymakers today often complain that, were it not for the US financial crisis, the eurozone would be doing just fine.
Perhaps they are right.
But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks, including big ones.
Europe may never be an “optimum” currency area by any standard.
But, without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.
A Century of Chinese Protests
A Chinese Champion of Peace and Freedom
PRAGUE – On Christmas Day last year, one of China’s best-known human rights activists, the writer and university professor Liu Xiaobo, was condemned to 11 years in prison.
Liu is one of the main drafters of Charter 08, a petition inspired by Czechoslovakia’s Charter 77, calling on the Chinese government to adhere to its own laws and constitution, and demanding the open election of public officials, freedom of religion and expression, and the abolition of “subversion” laws.
For his bravery and clarity of thought about China’s future, Liu deserves the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
There are two reasons why we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of that prestigious award.
First and foremost, he stands in the tradition of Nobel Peace Prize laureates who have been recognized for their contribution to the struggle for human rights.
Nobel laureates such as Martin Luther King, Lech Walesa, and Aung San Suu Kyi are but a few of the many examples that the Nobel Committee has recognized in previous years.
We are convinced that the concepts that Liu and his colleagues put down on paper in December 2008 are both universal and timeless.
These ideals – respect for human rights and human dignity, and the responsibility of citizens to ensure that their governments respect those rights – represent humanity’s highest aspirations.
Should the Nobel Committee choose to recognize Liu’s courage and sacrifice in articulating these ideals, it would not only draw global attention to the injustice of Liu’s 11-year sentence.
It would also help to amplify within China the universal and humanistic values for which Liu has spent so much of his life fighting.
The second reason why Liu deserves the Nobel Peace Prize resonates with Alfred Nobel’s original intent for the award.
In working to promote human rights, political reform, and democratization in China, Liu has made a significant contribution to the values of peace and fraternity among nations that Nobel had in mind when he created the award more than a century ago.
Of course, democratization does not automatically guarantee better behavior on the world stage.
But it does facilitate a full and rigorous public debate over key questions of a state’s foreign and domestic policies.
This active and searching conversation, the hallmark of a democratic polity, is the best hope for better decisions by governments, both at home and abroad.
Liu’s committed advocacy on behalf of democracy in China is, above all, intended for the benefit of the Chinese people.
But his courage and example may help to accelerate the dawn of the day when China’s participation in international affairs is aided by the expertise and oversight of civil-society groups, an independent media, and an engaged citizenry able to express its views through the ballot box.
It is primarily for these two reasons that we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
In conferring on Liu one of the world’s highest honors, the Committee would be signaling once again the importance of human rights and democracy on the one hand, and world peace and international solidarity on the other.
Liu’s harsh prison sentence was meant as an exemplary measure, a stern warning to all other Chinese who might want to follow his path.
We are convinced that there are moments when exemplary civic engagement, such as Liu’s, requires an exemplary response.
Awarding him the Nobel Peace Prize is precisely the response that his courage deserves.
A Civilization in Crisis
A Climate Deal is Not Enough
AMSTERDAM – During the COP15 climate summit in Copenhagen, world leaders have been negotiating the future of our planet.
All the signs suggest that they are unlikely to sign a global climate treaty.
The views of the various countries, and of the various industrial and political power blocs, differ too much.
The politicians, civil servants, and other participants at the Copenhagen summit have mainly been bombarding each other with numbers.
Figures on how much various countries should reduce CO2 emissions, the amount of money they should put up in coming years, the exact nature of their responsibilities, how much temperature increase Earth will be able to endure, and how long we can continue to wait.
These are all very important issues.
But the mere figures are simply not enough.
A different approach to the problem of climate change is needed.
The climate issue can only be solved on the basis of shared, deeply felt ethical principles.
Humanity has reached a critical moment in Earth’s history, at which peoples and nations will have to recognize their solidarity – with each other and with the Earth – and start acting upon it.
Similar to the way world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration in September 2000, and embraced the resulting Millennium Development Goals, today’s climate negotiators will have to commit themselves to creating a basis of shared fundamental ethical principles.
Such a basis is not hard to find.
Its inspiration can be the Earth Charter, which, launched in 2000, was initiated by, among others, former USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Wangari Mathaai, who received the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts in the Green Belt Movement, a pan-African tree-planting initiative.
The climate problem does not stop at borders.
In the next few decades, a low-lying country like the Netherlands will need to invest billions of euros to intensify its age-old struggle against rising water.
But in many other countries, the water is already flooding over the dikes, both literally and figuratively.
Climate change affects particularly those countries that lack the money needed to take adequate measures against rising sea levels, persistent droughts, or devastating storms, even though they had nothing to do with the primary cause of these problems – industrialization in the developed countries.
Apart from the necessary, often infrastructural adaptations to survive the effects of climate change, enormous efforts to prevent even worse things from happening are required.
Large investments in forestation, agriculture, and energy supply are called for.
In devising solutions, the role of women should be the main focus.
Women are often the first people who have to address the problem of gaining access to natural resources, and they are capable of playing a major role as pioneers in finding solutions to climate change and the way humankind should adapt to it.
In the short term, the world should become a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters. This is a mission for all humankind, in which patriotic feelings and thinking in terms of power blocs have no place.
The pursuit of a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters requires a tremendous effort.
Precisely for this reason, it also requires a broadly shared ethical basis.
This would guide the negotiating parties in such a way that they look not only for solutions to a part of the problem, but first and foremost at a comprehensive solution to the entire problem.
The climate change issue is too important to be left in the care of politicians.
In Copenhagen, it is therefore imperative that not only nation states, but the business community and citizens combine their efforts to save our planet’s climate.
That is not only a scientific necessity; it is an ethical imperative.
A Cloud over Airplane Safety
PRINCETON – When airports across Europe reopened after the closure caused by the eruption of Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano, it was not because the amount of ash in the atmosphere had dropped, but because the risk that the ash posed to airplane safety had been reassessed.
Was it new scientific information that led to the lifting of the flight ban, or was it a reflection of the hardship, both personal and economic, that the ban was causing?
Over six days, about 95,000 flights were canceled, at a cost to airlines of more than $1 billion. An estimated five million people were stranded or delayed.
The British economy lost £1.5 billion, and others were similarly affected.
Flower growers in Kenya, who depend on air transport to take their short-lived product to Europe, suddenly had no income.
Sixteen cancer patients in critical need of bone marrow for transplants were put at risk because the matching marrow could not be flown in from the United States or Canada.
In the past, jets flying into ash from volcanoes in the US, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Mexico have temporarily lost engine power, and in one case, dropped thousands of feet, although all managed to land safely. But there was no evidence that the more widely dispersed ash blowing over Europe from Iceland would cause similar problems.
The decision to ground flights was based on the view that any level of ash in the atmosphere posed some risk to aircraft, and that no matter how slight that risk might be, the government’s job was, as British Prime Minister Gordon Brown put it, “to make sure that safety was paramount.”
Indeed, in closing their skies, European governments seem to have given safety absolute priority over everything else.
Yet none of them act on that principle in other areas.
Some 3,000 people die on the world’s roads every day.
Cutting speed limits to, say, 10 kilometers per hour would prevent most accidents and save many lives.
We don’t do it, because we give safety a lower priority than our desire to spend less time driving.
The price we are willing to pay for safety cannot be infinite.
It is distasteful to put a price on human life, but the more we spend on safety, the less we will have for our other goals.
The British government uses a figure of a little more than £1 million as a general limit to the amount it is prepared to pay to save a statistical life – for example, by improving road safety.
In the US, the Department of Transportation is prepared to go up to $5.8 million – nearly four times as much, at current exchange rates – for the same purpose.
Does that mean that safety is paramount in the US, but not in Britain?
Giovanni Bisignani, the head of the International Air Transport Association, an industry group, criticized the shutdown, saying that no risk assessment had been undertaken.
On the whole, though, the public seemed to support the decision.
Stranded travelers, interviewed at airports, typically said that they would rather be stuck at an airport than in a plane falling out of the sky.
But what if some travelers have a higher tolerance of risk, or just a more urgent need to travel, than others?
John Stuart Mill, in his classic book On Liberty, considered a situation in which a man sets out to cross a bridge that we know is unsafe.
In Mill’s view, we are justified in stopping him only to make sure that he is aware of the danger.
Once he knows of it, the decision is his to make, because only he can judge the importance of his journey, and balance that against the risk he is running.
Air safety is slightly different, because a crashing plane can kill people on the ground, but the greatest risks by far are borne by the passengers and crew.
If they are fully informed of the risks, and are still willing to fly – perhaps the crew has been offered more money, as workers in dangerous occupations often are – should we prevent them from making the decision to fly?
In the end, after test flights with no passengers aboard had shown no engine damage, and aircraft engine manufacturers told aviation authorities that their engines could operate safely with a low level of ash in the atmosphere, Europe’s skies were reopened.
The International Civil Aviation Authority has announced that it will convene a group of experts to help it provide guidance for the industry to decide what level of ash in the atmosphere makes it unsafe to fly.
Now that we have seen the costs of giving absolute priority to safety, we know that this is not only a technical question.
I trust that among the experts will be some who have pondered the underlying ethical question: how safe should we aim to be?
A Communist Party without Communism
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed him in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia’s leaders have not changed a whit.
It looks increasingly likely that, as under Leonid Brezhnev, we will see the same names in the news for decades to come.
According to Gleb Pavlovsky, the Putin regime’s leading ideologist, the current Russian system is perfect in all respects but one: it doesn’t know its enemies.
Indeed, it seems as if everyone in the Kremlin is reading Carl Schmitt, the Nazi legal theorist who taught that naming your enemy is the central mission of politics.
In the spirit of Schmitt, Putin’s men designated a liberal party, the Union of Right Forces, as their ur-enemy.
Its public meetings were broken up by armed police; its leaders arrested and beaten; Putin called its supporters “coyotes.”
What is surprising is that this aggressive behavior occurred in response to no visible danger.
Oil prices are soaring, as are Putin’s approval ratings.
His appointees control everything that matters, from Gazprom to the Central Electoral Committee.
Since the pacification of Chechnya with violence and subsidies, the incarceration or emigration of a few financially viable opponents, and the massive “social investments” of recent years, which, under Medvedev’s personal supervision, have bribed the population, no credible force can seriously challenge Putin’s men.
Yet their regime is in crisis, and they know it.
Russia’s economy is more dependent on gas and oil than ever before.
Military reform has been reversed.
Despite increasing incomes, Russians are less educated and less healthy than they were when Putin came to power; they still die at a shockingly young age.
Russian involvement in world affairs is tainted by poison and corruption.
State monopolies undo what private businesses created.
With more money, ill-educated bureaucrats hire more ill-educated bureaucrats; as a result, the regime fails to rule the country.
The country is unruly, and its rulers know it.
So they panic.
Putin’s aim was to subject all power to the control of Russia’s security forces.
His generation of KGB officers watched the collapse of the Communist Party and all the governmental bodies that it “directed and controlled,” including the KGB.
Under Putin, the security service has had its revenge.
Its people have become powerful, arrogant, and enormously rich.
They have also become disobedient.
In 2004, General Viktor Cherkesov, then Putin’s representative in northwest Russia, published an essay that glorified the KGB as the only unspoiled authority in a corrupted country.
This essay, more than anything else, defined Putin’s second term.
In October 2007, Cherkesov (now chief of one of the most obscure and powerful services, the Federal Anti-Drug Administration) published another essay in which he lamented his colleagues’ degradation: warriors had turned into traders, he complained.
Earlier, generals from a competing service, the FSB, had arrested Cherkesov’s deputy for “illegal bugging.”
In a public gesture of despair, Cherkesov admitted the failure of Putin’s project to reanimate Russian governance by subordinating it to the security services.
Cherkesov’s deputy remains in prison.
Most believe that Putin is unable to intervene in his defense.
In the absence of Communist Party control, these security officers betrayed their corporate ethic and engaged in horse-trading, applying force when a trade did not go well.
That this happens to ordinary Russians is clear; what Cherkesov revealed was that Putin’s circle also confronts this situation.
What is to be done when ex-KGB warriors turn their swords and bugs against one another?
Cherkesov’s case exemplifies Putin’s nightmare.
But if your instincts betray you, you go back to even deeper ones.
Now that Putin’s people have left their predecessors’ neo-liberal ideas behind and feel disenchanted with the ex-KGB clique, the task is to recreate an omnipresent political party that controls the security services, the administration, business, and much else.
This party will be centralized under personal leadership and will reduce the state to a legal fiction.
Preaching nationalism, its managers will believe in their universal competence, as opposed to KGB-style professionalism and corporatism.
Boris Yeltsin forbade party cells in state-controlled institutions by decree.
Putin’s lawyers will reverse that decision; the party will have cells or committees in every factory, corporation, military unit, university department, etc.
Integrated by the leader’s charisma and party discipline, party members will direct and unify the desolated country.
This is Putin’s plan.
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, the only other KGB man to rule Russia, Putin will become the party’s general secretary. As in the Soviet era, state and governmental officials will be reduced to party ciphers – the role that President Medvedev will play under General Secretary Putin.
And, of course, being General Secretary carries no constitutional term limit.
In the end, Putin has what history left him: not ideas, just a faction yearning to consolidate its grip on power.
Lenin and Trotsky needed a party to make their ideology a reality; Putin and Medvedev are devising an ideology to solidify their party.
It is a bizarre ideology.
Accusing warriors of being traders and traders of being thieves, it shuns its Marxist origins.
It will subordinate all who really do work – traders, warriors, journalists, and others – to party ideologues whose sole job is to search for enemies.
A Confederation for Kosovo
Time is running out in Kosovo.
If a United Nations-backed settlement is not reached by early December, the province’s majority Albanian population is likely to declare independence unilaterally – a move that the United States has announced it may support.
That would be a disastrous step.
Russia would be furious, because it fears that Kosovo’s secession – whether or not it is internationally recognized – might fuel separatist movements in the former Soviet empire. Serbia is even more strongly opposed.
Dusan Prorokovic, Serbia’s state secretary for Kosovo, has said that his country might use force to maintain its sovereignty.
Even if the government hesitates, ultranationalist groups might push Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to send in troops: the current UN presence in Kosovo is very thin (only 40 “military observers” and 2,116 policemen) but the stationing of 15,000 NATO troops could make any armed clash very dangerous.
After eight years of international administration, Kosovo’s Albanian majority has tasted freedom and is eager for full independence. But Serbia claims that the province remains an essential part of its historical and cultural tradition.
Moreover, independence would not be accepted by the Serbian public, which has already watched in dismay as “Great Serbia” has been gradually whittled away, most recently with the secession of Montenegro.
Serbia is prepared to concede only “enhanced autonomy” to Kosovo, and some capacity to enter into international agreements.
Yet, while the two parties now seem irreconcilable, it is not too late for compromise.
But this is possible only by resuscitating – and updating – an old institution of the international community: a confederation of states.
By means of a binding UN Security Council resolution, Kosovo could be granted full and exclusive authority over its citizens and territory, as well as limited capacity for action on the international scene. It could be authorized to enter into trade agreements as well as agreements concerning individuals (for example, admission and circulation of foreigners, or extradition), plus the right to seek admission to the UN (which does not require full sovereignty and independence).

Kosovo would thus gain some essential trappings of statehood.
However, a decision-making body consisting of delegates from Kosovo, Serbia, and the European Union would be given full authority over major foreign policy issues (for example, alliances and relations with international economic institutions), defence, borders (in case Kosovo wished to join with Albania), and the treatment of Kosovo’s Serbian minority. As a result, Kosovo and Serbia would constitute two distinct international subjects, bound by a confederation hinging on a common decision-making body.
Of course, this confederation would be asymmetrical, because the Serbian government’s sovereignty over the rest of Serbia would remain intact and unlimited, whereas the Kosovar government’s “sovereignty” over Kosovo would be restrained.
To avoid one of the two parties getting the upper hand and imposing arbitrary decisions, the common decision-making body should consist of four Serbian delegates, two Kosovar delegates, and three representatives of the EU, thus requiring both sides to gain the support of the European delegates.
In addition, the EU should create a small but effective military force (say, 5,000 troops) to back up the common body’s decisions.
As with any compromise, the contending parties would both gain and lose from this arrangement. Serbia would save face, and would continue to have a say on crucial matters concerning Kosovo, including the treatment of the Serbian minority.
Kosovo would acquire limited independence, with its status rising from a province of a sovereign state to an international subject capable of entering into certain agreements with other states and even joining the UN.
The EU would benefit as well, by contributing to the stabilization of a highly volatile area.
Subsequently, the EU would monitor Kosovo and prevent any dispute that might turn violent.
A final advantage of this solution is that it would be temporary.
Historically, confederations sooner or later either become federations (as occurred in the US, Germany, and Switzerland) or, pushed by centrifugal forces, split up (as with the United Arab Republic, established in 1958, which split three years later into Egypt and Syria).
The confederation I advocate would thus constitute an intermediate stage (lasting five or ten years), at the end of which Kosovo is likely to become fully independent.
Delaying a final solution in this way would provide time to verify Kosovo’s prospects of joining the EU and thus eventually sharing “sovereign authority” with other independent states, which could deflate Kosovars’ dangerously robust nationalistic demands.
A Conservative Europe
Last week Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, and Gerhard Schroeder met in Berlin. They departed pledging to revive Europe's growth.
We've heard that empty promise before.
Instead, the European Union needs a new direction.
I say this as leader of the party which has been at the forefront of Britain's engagement with Europe.
It was a Conservative government that first applied for membership in the early 1960's.
A Conservative government took the United Kingdom into the European Economic Community in 1973.
Margaret Thatcher worked with Jacques Delors to forge the Single Market in 1986.
So I have no doubt that Britain must remain influential within the Union.
But British policy towards the EU has often led to worse rather than better relations among member states.
Faced with a new EU initiative, our traditional response has often been to oppose it, vote against it, lose the vote, then sulkily to adopt it while blaming everyone else.
Many Europeans are sick of British vetoes.
So am I.
Of course there are basic requirements that all member states must accept.
Foremost are the four freedoms of the single market; free movement of goods, services, people and capital.
But a single market does not require a single social or industrial policy, far less a common taxation policy.
Allowing countries to pursue their own policies in these areas encourages competitiveness.
Forcing common standards means that Europe will fall further behind as member states shuffle their costs onto their neighbours.
Which areas should be applied to every member state, and which should be optional?
I believe that every member state should administer those policies that do not directly and significantly affect other member states.
In areas which serve their national interest, individual members should decide whether to retain wholly national control or whether to co‑operate with others.
The Union's members should form a series of overlapping circles: different combinations of members should be able to pool their responsibilities in different areas of their own choosing.
Precedents exist for this. NATO has been flexible since its inception.
France signed up for membership but later refused to submit her armed forces to NATO's central command.
Similar flexibility exists with the Euro, the Schengen Agreement, and the Social Chapter.
These precedents can be extended.
So far, everyone has had to move forward together, with individual countries negotiating specific opt‑outs.
But since 1998, there has been a procedure within the Treaties - called enhanced co‑operation - that could allow some members to go ahead with further integration in a specific area without involving every other member.
Instead of individual member states having fraught negotiations to opt‑out of a new initiative, those that support it can simply opt‑in.
Countries that want to integrate further can do so.
They don't need to drag Britain and others kicking and screaming in their wake because the others are not compelled to join them.
In this way we can break free of the institutionalised tug of war that has characterised EU relations.
I am not talking about a two‑speed Europe.
That implies that we all agree on the destination and differ only about the speed of the journey.
I don't want to reach the destination that some of our partners may aspire to.
But I don't want to block their way.
There are some who say that this would mean a loss of influence on the part of those countries which choose not to integrate more closely.
But influence is not an end in itself - it is a means to an end.
Britain does not need a seat at the table when decisions on the Euro are taken.
Our economy has not been adversely affected by staying out.
Keeping the pound does not mean that we oppose the Euro, or hope for its failure.
The European Union should stop trying to do everything and concentrate on doing fewer things more effectively.
It should give member states the chance to develop an approach to Europe that suits their national traditions, within the EU framework.
It is on this basis that British Conservatives oppose the proposed constitution.
We disagree with many of its contents, of course, but also oppose the idea of having an EU constitution at all.
There is a world of difference between an association of nation states bound together by treaty, and a single entity, whether you call it a state or not, with its own legal personality, deriving its authority from its own constitution.
If this constitution were accepted in anything like the proposed form, the EU would gain many attributes and trappings of statehood: its own president and foreign minister, its own legal system.
The supremacy of EU law would derive not from Acts of national Parliaments but from a supra‑national constitution.
That is a radical change, not the mere tidying‑up exercise some suggest.
I do not believe it is right to make a change of such magnitude without specifically consulting the people on whose behalf we govern.
Elected parliaments do not own our liberties.
They safeguard them, and should not diminish those liberties without an explicit mandate.
Any proposal for a new constitution must be put to the British people and to the people in each EU member state.
A Conspiracy So Immense
NEW YORK – Is this the Age of the Conspiracy Theory?
Plenty of evidence suggests that we are in something of a golden age for citizen speculation, documentation, and inference that takes shape – usually on the Internet – and spreads virally around the globe.
In the process, conspiracy theories are pulled from the margins of public discourse, where they were generally consigned in the past, and sometimes into the very heart of politics.
I learned this by accident.
Having written a book about the hijacking of executive power in the United States in the Bush years, I found myself, in researching new developments, stumbling upon conversations online that embrace narratives of behind-the-scenes manipulation.
There are some major themes.
A frequent one in the US is that global elites are plotting – via the Bilderberg Group and the Council on Foreign Relations, among others – to establish a “One World Government” dominated by themselves rather than national governments.
Sometimes, more folkloric details come into play, broadening the members of this cabal to include the Illuminati, the Freemasons, Rhodes Scholars, or, as always, the Jews.
The hallmarks of this narrative are familiar to anyone who has studied the transmission of certain story categories in times of crisis.
In literary terms, this conspiracy theory closely resembles The Protocols of the Elders of Zion , featuring secretive global elite with great power and wicked aims.
Historically, there tends to be the same set of themes: fearsome, uncontrolled transformative change led by educated, urbanized cosmopolitans.
Students of Weimar Germany know that sudden dislocations and shocks – rapid urbanization, disruption of traditional family and social ties, loosening of sexual restrictions, and economic collapse – primed many Germans to become receptive to simplistic theories that seemed to address their confusion and offer a larger meaning to their suffering.
Similarly, the “9/11 Truth Movement” asserts that al-Qaeda’s attack on the Twin Towers was an “inside job.”
In the Muslim world, there is a widespread conspiracy theory that the Israelis were behind those attacks, and that all Jews who worked in the buildings stayed home that day.
Usually, conspiracy theories surface where people are poorly educated and a rigorous independent press is lacking.
So why are such theories gaining adherents in the US and other affluent democracies nowadays?
Today’s explosion of conspiracy theories has been stoked by the same conditions that drove their acceptance in the past: rapid social change and profound economic uncertainty.
A clearly designated “enemy” with an unmistakable “plan” is psychologically more comforting than the chaotic evolution of social norms and the workings – or failures – of unfettered capitalism.
And, while conspiracy theories are often patently irrational, the questions they address are often healthy, even if the answers are frequently unsourced or just plain wrong.
In seeking answers, these citizens are reacting rationally to irrational realities.
Many citizens believe, rightly, that their mass media are failing to investigate and document abuses.
Newspapers in most advanced countries are struggling or folding, and investigative reporting is often the first thing they cut. Concentration of media ownership and control further fuels popular mistrust, setting the stage for citizen investigation to enter the vacuum.
Likewise, in an age when corporate lobbyists have a free hand in shaping – if not drafting – public policies, many people believe, again rightly, that their elected officials no longer represent them.
Hence their impulse to believe in unseen forces.
Finally, even rational people have become more receptive to certain conspiracy theories because, in the last eight years, we actually have seen some sophisticated conspiracies. The Bush administration conspired to lead Americans and others into an illegal war, using fabricated evidence to do so.
Is it any wonder, then, that so many rational people are trying to make sense of a political reality that really has become unusually opaque?
When even the 9/11 commissioners renounce their own conclusions (because they were based on evidence derived from torture), is it surprising that many want a second investigation?
Frequently enough, it is citizens digging at the margins of the discourse – pursuing such theories – who report on news that the mainstream media ignores.
For example, it took a “conspiracy theorist,” Alex Jones, to turn up documentation of microwave technologies to be used by police forces on US citizens. The New Yorker confirmed the story much later – without crediting the original source.
The mainstream media’s tendency to avoid checking out or reporting what is actually newsworthy in Internet conspiracy theories partly reflects class bias.
Conspiracy theories are seen as vulgar and lowbrow.
So even good, critical questions or well-sourced data unearthed by citizen investigators tend to be regarded as radioactive to highly educated formal journalists.
The real problem with this frantic conspiracy theorizing is that it leaves citizens emotionally agitated but without a solid ground of evidence upon which to base their worldview, and without constructive directions in which to turn their emotions.
This is why so many threads of discussion turn from potentially interesting citizen speculation to hate speech and paranoia. In a fevered environment, without good editorial validation or tools for sourcing, citizens can be preyed upon and whipped up by demagogues, as we saw in recent weeks at Sarah Palin’s rallies after Internet theories painted Barack Obama as a terrorist or in league with terrorists.
We need to change the flow of information in the Internet age.
Citizens should be able more easily to leak information, pitch stories, and send leads to mainstream investigative reporters. They should organize new online entities in which they pay a fee for direct investigative reporting, unmediated by corporate pressures.
And citizen investigators should be trained in basic journalism: finding good data, confirming stories with two independent sources, using quotes responsibly, and eschewing anonymity – that is, standing by their own bylines, as conventional reporters do.
This is how citizens can be taken – and take themselves – seriously as documenters and investigators of our common situation.
In a time of official lies, healthy investigative energy should shed light, not just generate heat.
A Constitutional Coup in Ukraine
Changing constitutions is always a risky business.
But it is a downright dangerous one when undertaken to benefit one man alone.
Indeed, when a president volunteers to reduce the powers of his own office, you can be certain that he is up to no good.
That is exactly what is going on in Ukraine, where President Leonid Kuchma proposes to junk our presidential system and replace it with a strange type of parliamentary system he has concocted.
Kuchma has not suddenly converted to the view that parliamentary democracies are better than presidential ones.
No, Kuchma wants to change Ukraine's constitution for no other reason than to maintain his grip on power.
Today, Kuchma rules as an all-powerful president.
But his term ends next year and he cannot run again.
So, instead of retiring gracefully, as presidents from Bill Clinton to Boris Yeltsin routinely do, Kuchma wants to change the constitution in order to become an all-powerful prime minister who will never face a limit on the length of his term.
Of course, constitutions are not meant to protect the status quo if the status quo is rotten.
Constitutions can, and should, accommodate reform when necessary.
A powerful president, however, is not necessarily wrong for Ukraine. In our wrenching postcommunist transition, it is essential that a government can act decisively.
To change a system that seems best suited to Ukraine's circumstances, you need a good reason.
The Ukraine president is authorized to appoint and sack the prime minister, dissolve parliament if he wishes, and rule by decree if he judges that the country's institutions are in danger.
He maintains day-to-day control over every aspect of government.
So
Kuchma is not.
On the contrary, what is rotten in Ukraine is not its constitution, but its president, who is mired in charges of corruption and orchestrating the murder of journalists, and who is shunned by other world leaders.
As president, Kuchma is grotesquely unpopular.
Even Slobodan Milosevic had more support in Yugoslavia before his fall.
So Kuchma knows that he cannot rely on handpicking his successor, as Yeltsin did in Russia.
Unable to assure himself of a tame presidential successor, Kuchma wants what he calls a "parliamentary republic" with a weak president and powerful prime minister.
But the parliament he has in mind is a mutant, one where the authoritarian rule of the criminal clans Kuchma controls will continue, unabated, behind the facade of parliamentary procedure.
People too easily forget Ukraine, this big country on the border of the soon-to-be enlarged European Union.
But any attempt to prolong Kuchma's rule will create such a political mess that it is not absurd to fear that Ukraine could follow Belarus and the Balkans of the early 1990's into outright dictatorship and chaos.
Indeed, this scenario could worsen, because Russia is unlikely to sit around idly and watch Ukraine unravel.
Intervention of some type seems more likely in such circumstances.
Only an imperial Russia, however, would dare reabsorb Ukraine.
But an imperial Russia cannot be a democratic Russia.
So Kuchma endangers freedom and human rights not only in Ukraine, but ultimately threatens Russia's democracy as well.
Luckily, there has never been a better time for the West--particularly the EU--to nudge Ukraine back from the brink.
With EU expansion coming next spring, all Ukrainians fear that a new wall will cut their country off from the Union's easternmost border in Poland.
Although the job of maintaining Ukraine's democracy is primarily one for Ukrainians, the EU can help if it takes practical steps to reassure Ukrainians that they won't be cut off from the rest of Europe.
A generous visa regime and the use of regional development funds in Ukraine that will benefit impoverished eastern Poland, are two possible inducements.
But these should be made conditional on Kuchma leaving the country's constitution and democracy alone.
The EU should not fret about interfering in Ukraine's domestic affairs.
After all, it hesitated little a few years ago to put a current member state, Austria, on notice that it was watching out for the welfare of that country's democracy.
The wayward Kuchma is far more deserving of Europe imposing safeguards to ensure his good behavior.
Similarly, the US should cast a wary eye at Kuchma's decision to send troops to Iraq.
It cannot be the case that America's fidelity to democracy in Ukraine can be so cynically purchased.
Within Ukraine, a government capable of truly governing should seek to adopt EU laws and norms in exactly the manner that the countries poised to join the Union have done, thus helping to clean up the murky system in which Kuchma's criminal cronies flourish.
The constitution must be reformed, but not to shift power from one unaccountable leader to another. What is needed are clear checks on arbitrary rule, and transparency in decision-making.
No one should doubt that Kuchma intends to stay in power, no matter what.
Less certain is whether he will feel secure enough to hold a presidential election (or any other kind of election) if he cannot change the constitution in a way that guarantees his continued misrule.
It is, after all, President Kuchma who is discredited, not Ukraine's constitutional arrangements.
A Contagion of Bad Ideas

NEW YORK – The Great Recession of 2008 has morphed into the North Atlantic Recession: it is mainly Europe and the United States, not the major emerging markets, that have become mired in slow growth and high unemployment. And it is Europe and America that are marching, alone and together, to the denouement of a grand debacle.
A busted bubble led to a massive Keynesian stimulus that averted a much deeper recession, but that also fueled substantial budget deficits.
The response – massive spending cuts – ensures that unacceptably high levels of unemployment (a vast waste of resources and an oversupply of suffering) will continue, possibly for years.
The European Union has finally committed itself to helping its financially distressed members.
It had no choice: with financial turmoil threatening to spread from small countries like Greece and Ireland to large ones like Italy and Spain, the euro’s very survival was in growing jeopardy.
Europe’s leaders recognized that distressed countries’ debts would become unmanageable unless their economies could grow, and that growth could not be achieved without assistance.
But, even as Europe’s leaders promised that help was on the way, they doubled down on the belief that non-crisis countries must cut spending.
The resulting austerity will hinder Europe’s growth, and thus that of its most distressed economies: after all, nothing would help Greece more than robust growth in its trading partners. And low growth will hurt tax revenues, undermining the proclaimed goal of fiscal consolidation.
The discussions before the crisis illustrated how little had been done to repair economic fundamentals.
The European Central Bank’s vehement opposition to what is essential to all capitalist economies – the restructuring of failed or insolvent entities’ debt – is evidence of the continuing fragility of the Western banking system.
The ECB argued that taxpayers should pick up the entire tab for Greece’s bad sovereign debt, for fear that any private-sector involvement (PSI) would trigger a “credit event,” which would force large payouts on credit-default swaps (CDSs), possibly fueling further financial turmoil.
But, if that is a real fear for the ECB – if it is not merely acting on behalf of private lenders – surely it should have demanded that the banks have more capital.
Likewise, the ECB should have barred banks from the risky CDS market, where they are held hostage to ratings agencies’ decisions about what constitutes a “credit event.”
Indeed, one positive achievement by European leaders at the recent Brussels summit was to begin the process of reining in both the ECB and the power of the American ratings agencies.
Indeed, the most curious aspect of the ECB’s position was its threat not to accept restructured government bonds as collateral if the ratings agencies decided that the restructuring should be classified as a credit event.
The whole point of restructuring was to discharge debt and make the remainder more manageable. If the bonds were acceptable as collateral before the restructuring, surely they were safer after the restructuring, and thus equally acceptable.
This episode serves as a reminder that central banks are political institutions, with a political agenda, and that independent central banks tend to be captured (at least “cognitively”) by the banks that they are supposed to regulate.
And matters are little better on the other side of the Atlantic.
There, the extreme right threatened to shut down the US government, confirming what game theory suggests: when those who are irrationally committed to destruction if they don’t get their way confront rational individuals, the former prevail.
As a result, President Barack Obama acquiesced in an unbalanced debt-reduction strategy, with no tax increases – not even for the millionaires who have done so well during the past two decades, and not even by eliminating tax giveaways to oil companies, which undermine economic efficiency and contribute to environmental degradation.

Optimists argue that the short run macroeconomic impact of the deal to raise America’s debt ceiling and prevent sovereign default will be limited – roughly $25 billion in expenditure cuts in the coming year. But the payroll-tax cut (which put more than $100 billion into the pockets of ordinary Americans) was not renewed, and surely business, anticipating the contractionary effects down the line, will be even more reluctant to lend.
The end of the stimulus itself is contractionary.
And, with housing prices continuing to fall, GDP growth faltering, and unemployment remaining stubbornly high (one of six Americans who would like a full-time job still cannot get one), more stimulus, not austerity, is needed – for the sake of balancing the budget as well. The single most important driver of deficit growth is weak tax revenues, owing to poor economic performance; the single best remedy would be to put America back to work.
The recent debt deal is a move in the wrong direction.
There has been much concern about financial contagion between Europe and America.
After all, America’s financial mismanagement played an important role in triggering Europe’s problems, and financial turmoil in Europe would not be good for the US – especially given the fragility of the US banking system and the continuing role it plays in non-transparent CDSs.
But the real problem stems from another form of contagion: bad ideas move easily across borders, and misguided economic notions on both sides of the Atlantic have been reinforcing each other.
The same will be true of the stagnation that those policies bring.
A Cool Calculus of Global Warming
The British government recently issued the most comprehensive study to date of the economic costs and risks of global warming, and of measures that might reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in the hope of averting some of the direst consequences. Written under the leadership of Sir Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics, who succeeded me as Chief Economist of the World Bank, the report makes clear that the question is no longer whether we can afford to do anything about global warming, but whether we can afford not to.

The report proposes an agenda whose cost would be equivalent to just 1% of annual consumption, but would save the world risk equivalent costs that are five times greater.
The reported costs of global warming are higher than in earlier studies because it takes into account the mounting evidence that the process of global warming is highly complex and non-linear, with a non-negligible chance that it may proceed much faster than had previously been thought and that the extent of warming may be much greater than had previously been thought.
Indeed, the study may actually significantly underestimate the costs: for instance, climate change may lead to more weather variability, a possible disappearance or major shift of the Gulf Stream – of particular concern to Europe – and a flourishing of disease.
When I served in 1995 on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the scientific group that periodically assesses the science of global warming, there was overwhelming evidence that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere had increased markedly since the beginning of the industrial revolution, that human activity had contributed significantly to those increases, and that they would have profound effects on climate and sea levels.
But few saw, for instance, the Artic ice cap melting as rapidly as now seems to be the case.
Still, some suggest that because we are not certain about how bad global warming will be, we should do little or nothing. To me, uncertainty should make us act more resolutely today, not less.
As one scientist friend puts it: if you are driving on a mountain road, approaching a cliff, in a car whose brakes may fail, and a fog bank rolls in, should you drive more or less cautiously?
Global warming is one of those rare instances where the scientific community is more fearful of what may be happening than the population at large.
Scientists have glimpsed what the future may portend.
As the Stern report points out, as usual, the poor are the most vulnerable.
A third of Bangladesh will be underwater by the end of this century.
The Maldives and a host of Pacific Island states will disappear: our twenty-first-century Atlantis.
To an economist, the problem is obvious: polluters are not paying the full costs of the damage they cause.
Pollution is a global externality of enormous proportions.
The advanced countries might mean Bangladesh and the disappearing island states no harm, but no war could be more devastating.
A global externality can best be dealt with by a globally agreed tax rate.
This does not mean an increase in overall taxation, but simply a substitution in each country of a pollution (carbon) tax for some current taxes. It makes much more sense to tax things that are bad, like pollution, than things that are good, like savings and work.
Although President George W. Bush says he believes in markets, in this case he has called for voluntary action.
But it makes far more sense to use the force of markets – the power of incentives – than to rely on goodwill, especially when it comes to oil companies that regard their sole objective as maximizing profits, regardless of the cost to others.
Exxon has reportedly been funding so-called think tanks to undermine confidence in the science of global warming, just as the tobacco industry funded “research” to question the validity of statistical findings showing the link between smoking and cancer.
Some companies even seem to celebrate the melting of the polar ice cap, because it will reduce the cost of extracting the oil that lies beneath the Arctic Ocean.
The good news is that there are many ways by which improved incentives could reduce emissions – partly by eliminating the myriad of subsidies for inefficient usages.
The US subsidizes corn-based ethanol, and imposes tariffs on sugar-based ethanol; hidden in the tax code are billions of dollars of subsidies to the oil and gas industries.
Most importantly, price signals that show the true social costs of energy derived from fossil fuels will encourage innovation and conservation. Small changes in practices, when replicated by hundreds of millions of people, can make an enormous difference.
For example, simply changing the color of roofs in warm climates to reflect sunlight or planting trees around houses can lead to great savings on energy used for air conditioning.
We have but one planet, and should treasure it.
Global warming is a risk that we simply cannot afford to ignore anymore.
A Cool Head for the Hottest Issues
LONDON – Reading Barack Obama’s Dreams from My Father , the US president’s beautifully written reflections on his early life and identity, most people are struck by his cool and intellectual approach.
This is not to say that he is unemotional.
Obama can rage and weep.
But he rarely seems to act on the basis of raw sentiment or instinctive prejudice.
Pragmatic and highly intelligent, sooner or later every issue receives the full attention of his forensic curiosity.
Recalling Hillary Clinton’s famous Democratic primary television advertisement, Obama, it turns out, is exactly the sort of president that most of us would want to have in the post for that 3 a.m. phone call about an international crisis.
He would not be afraid to act, but he would be prepared to think first.
I do not think, therefore, that Obama will be too vexed by some of the criticism he faces at the end of his first year in office, though he will undoubtedly grimace at the defeat of the Democratic candidate in the special election in Massachusetts to fill Ted Kennedy’s old seat.
Obama was praised extravagantly a year ago; 12 months on, the criticism is over the top, too.
Obama inherited a terrible legacy – recession, financial meltdown, Iraq, Afghanistan.
He has not solved all of these problems.
But it is difficult to see any really bad mistakes, except perhaps allowing himself to be pushed around by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and giving China the impression that he was prepared for a bilateral relationship entirely on China’s terms.
That seems to be changing now.
Obama may have come to understand that when you are the leader of the world’s only superpower, you need to be feared just a little if you are to be respected.
The left in America criticizes Obama for not turning the economy around already.
The right angrily denounces him as a crypto-communist because he wants every American to have health care.
With a dispassionate eye on the long game, what will the president himself be thinking?
One issue that Obama is certain to have in his sights is a problem that shadowed the world for years.